[PDF_PAGE 1]

Articles
https:/ / doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01346-6
1Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany. 2Department of Mathematics, T echnical University of Munich, Munich, 
Germany. 3Program for Computational and Systems Biology, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New Y ork, NY , USA. 
4Department of Computer Science, University of T übingen, T übingen, Germany. 5Zuse Institute Berlin (ZIB), Berlin, Germany. 6Institute of Diabetes 
and Regeneration Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany. 7German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Neuherberg, Germany. 
8Comprehensive Pneumology Center (CPC) / Institute of Lung Biology and Disease (ILBD), Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center 
for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, Germany. 9TUM School of Life Sciences Weihenstephan, T echnical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 10Present 
address: Basic Sciences Division and T ranslational Data Science IRC, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle WA, USA. ✉e-mail: peerd@mskcc.org; 
fabian.theis@helmholtz-muenchen.de
C
ells undergo state transitions during many biological pro -
cesses, including development, reprogramming, regeneration 
and cancer, and they typically do so in a highly asynchronous 
fashion1. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) successfully cap-
tures the heterogeneity that results from these processes, but it loses 
lineage relationships, since each cell can be measured only once. To 
mitigate this problem, scRNA-seq can be combined with lineage 
tracing methods
2,3 that use heritable barcodes to follow clonal evo -
lution over long time scales, or metabolic labeling methods 4–6 that 
use the ratio of nascent to mature RNA molecules to link observed 
gene expression profiles over short time windows. Y et both strat -
egies are mostly limited to in vitro applications, prompting the 
development of computational approaches to reconstruct pseudo
-
time trajectories1,7–12, which leverage the observation that develop -
mentally related cells tend to share similar gene expression profiles. 
Pseudotime approaches have been used extensively to order cells 
along differentiation trajectories and to study cell-fate decisions.
Computational trajectory inference typically demands prior 
biological knowledge to determine the directionality of cell state 
changes, often by specifying an initial cell
13, thereby limiting its 
applicability to normal developmental scenarios with known 
cell-fate hierarchies. RNA velocity
14 has been shown recently to 
alleviate this problem by reconstructing trajectory direction based 
on the spliced-to-unspliced mRNA ratio. The approach has been 
generalized to include transient cell populations and protein kinet
-
ics15,16; however, velocity estimates are noisy and the interpretation 
of high-dimensional velocity vectors has been limited mostly to 
low-dimensional projections, which do not easily reveal long-range 
probabilistic fates or allow quantitative interpretation.
Here, we present CellRank, a method that combines the robust-
ness of similarity-based trajectory inference with directional 
information from RNA velocity to learn directed, probabilistic 
state-change trajectories under either normal or perturbed condi
-
tions. Unlike other approaches, CellRank automatically infers initial, 
intermediate and terminal populations of an scRNA-seq dataset and 
computes fate probabilities that account for the stochastic nature of 
cellular fate decisions as well as uncertainty in velocity estimates. 
We use fate probabilities to uncover putative lineage drivers and to 
visualize lineage-specific gene expression trends. We demonstrate 
CellRank’s capabilities on pancreatic endocrine lineage develop
-
ment, correctly recovering initial and terminal states in addition to 
lineage bias and key driver genes for somatostatin-producing delta 
cell differentiation. We show that CellRank generalizes beyond 
normal development by applying it to a reprogramming dataset, 
where predicted fate bias correctly recovers lineage-tracing-derived 
ground truth. Further, by applying CellRank to lung regeneration, 
we predict a new dedifferentiation trajectory and experimentally 
validate newly discovered intermediate cell states. CellRank out
-
performs methods that do not include velocity information, and is 
available as a scalable, user-friendly open-source software package 
with documentation and tutorials at https://cellrank.org.
Results
CellRank combines cell–cell similarity with RNA velocity to 
model cellular state transitions. The CellRank algorithm aims 
to model the cell state dynamics of a system (Methods). CellRank 
detects the initial, terminal and intermediate cell states of the system 
and computes a global map of fate potentials, assigning each cell the 
probability of reaching each terminal state. Based on the inferred 
potentials, CellRank charts gene expression dynamics as cells take 
on different fates and identifies putative regulators of cell-fate 
 
decisions. The algorithm uses an scRNA-seq count matrix and 
CellRank for directed single-cell fate mapping
Marius Lange   1,2, Volker Bergen   1,2, Michal Klein1, Manu Setty3,10, Bernhard Reuter   4,5, 
Mostafa Bakhti   6,7, Heiko Lickert   6,7, Meshal Ansari   1,8, Janine Schniering8, Herbert B. Schiller   8, 
Dana Pe’er   3 ✉ and Fabian J. Theis   1,2,9 ✉
Computational trajectory inference enables the reconstruction of cell state dynamics from single-cell RNA sequencing experi-
ments. However, trajectory inference requires that the direction of a biological process is known, largely limiting its application 
to differentiating systems in normal development. Here, we present CellRank (https:/ / cellrank.org) for single-cell fate mapping 
in diverse scenarios, including regeneration, reprogramming and disease, for which direction is unknown. Our approach com-
bines the robustness of trajectory inference with directional information from RNA velocity, taking into account the gradual and 
stochastic nature of cellular fate decisions, as well as uncertainty in velocity vectors. On pancreas development data, CellRank 
automatically detects initial, intermediate and terminal populations, predicts fate potentials and visualizes continuous gene 
expression trends along individual lineages. Applied to lineage-traced cellular reprogramming data, predicted fate probabilities 
correctly recover reprogramming outcomes. CellRank also predicts a new dedifferentiation trajectory during postinjury lung 
regeneration, including previously unknown intermediate cell states, which we confirm experimentally.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods 159


[PDF_PAGE 2]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
corresponding RNA velocity matrix as input (Extended Data Figure 
1a,c). Note that, while we use RNA velocity here to approximate the 
direction of cellular dynamics, CellRank generalizes to accommo
-
date any vector field that provides a directional measure, such as 
metabolic labeling
4–6 or real time information17,18.
The main assumption underlying all pseudotime algorithms that 
faithfully capture trajectories1,7–10 is that cell states change in small 
steps with many transitional populations. CellRank uses the same 
assumption to model state transitions using a Markov chain, where 
each state in the chain is given by one observed cellular profile, and 
edge weights denote the probability of transitioning from one cell to 
another. The first step in chain construction is to compute an undi
-
rected K nearest neighbor (KNN) graph representing cell–cell simi-
larities in the phenotypic manifold (Fig. 1a,b and Extended Data 
Fig. 1b; Methods). Each node in the graph represents an observed 
cellular profile, and edges connect cells that are most similar.
Unlike pseudotime algorithms, we infuse directionality by using 
RNA velocity to direct Markov chain edges (Extended Data Fig. 
1c). The RNA velocity vector of a given cell uses splicing dynamics 
to predict which genes are currently being up- or downregulated, 
and thus points towards the likely future state of that cell. The more 
a neighboring cell lies in the direction of the velocity vector, the 
higher its transition probability (Methods). We compute a second 
set of transition probabilities based on gene expression similarity 
between cells and combine it with the first set via a weighted mean 
(Methods). The resulting matrix of directed transition probabili
-
ties is independent of any low-dimensional embedding and reflects 
transcriptional similarity as well as directional information given by 
RNA velocity.
The transition matrix may be extremely large, noisy and difficult 
to interpret. We alleviate these problems by summarizing individual 
gene expression profiles into macrostates, regions of the pheno
-
typic manifold that cells are unlikely to leave (Fig. 1c and Extended 
Data Fig. 2a–e). CellRank decomposes the dynamics of the Markov 
chain into these macrostates and computes coarse-grained tran
-
sition probabilities among them. The number of macrostates is a 
model parameter that can be chosen using knee-point heuristics 
or previous knowledge about the biological system (Extended Data 
Fig. 2b; Methods). Individual cells are assigned to macrostates 
via a soft assignment. To compute macrostates and the induced 
coarse-grained transition probabilities, we adapt Generalized 
Perron Cluster Cluster Analysis (GPCCA)
19,20 to the single-cell con-
text (Methods).
Viewing the biological system at coarse resolution allows us to 
identify populations based on transition probabilities: terminal 
macrostates will have high self-transition probability, initial macro-
states will have low incoming transition probability, and remaining 
macrostates will be intermediate. We automate the identification 
of terminal states through a stability index (SI) between zero and 
one, indicating self-transition probability; macrostates with an SI of 
0.96 or greater are classified as terminal. We automate the identi
-
fication of initial states through the coarse-grained stationary dis -
tribution (CGSD), which describes the long-term evolution of the 
coarse-grained Markov chain (Methods). The CGSD assigns small 
values to macrostates that the process is unlikely to revisit after leav
-
ing; these macrostates are classified as initial. The number of initial 
states is a parameter that is set to one by default.
Finally, CellRank uses the directed single-cell transition matrix 
to compute fate probability, the likelihood that a given cell will 
ultimately transition towards each terminal population defined in 
the previous step (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 2f). These prob
-
abilities can be efficiently computed for all cells by solving a linear 
system (Methods). Fate probabilities extend the short-range fate 
prediction given by RNA velocity to the global structure spanning 
initial to terminal states. The stochastic Markov chain-based for
-
mulation allows us to overcome noise in individual velocity vectors 
and cell–cell similarities by aggregating many of these into our final 
fate prediction. Moreover, by restricting transitions to be within the 
phenotypic manifold, CellRank captures cell state dynamics more 
faithfully.
Both the original velocyto and generalized scVelo models com
-
pute velocity vectors on the basis of spliced-to-unspliced count 
ratios
14,15. These counts are influenced by many sources of biologi -
cal and technical noise, such as ambient RNA, sparsity, doublets, 
bursting kinetics and low capture efficiency. Unspliced RNA in 
particular is rarer in the cell and suffers from low detection rates. 
The uncertainty in molecule counts translates into uncertainty in 
RNA velocity vectors, which can be estimated in scVelo (Extended 
Data Fig. 3a; Methods). CellRank accounts for these sources of 
uncertainty by propagating the estimated distribution over velocity 
vectors (Extended Data Fig. 3b,c). By default, it uses an analytical 
approximation that computes the expected value of the transition 
probabilities towards nearest neighbors, given the distribution over 
velocity vectors (Methods). The analytical approximation is very 
efficient and ensures that uncertainty can be estimated even for 
large datasets. Alternatively, CellRank has an option for far slower, 
more accurate computation of fate probabilities via Monte Carlo 
(MC) sampling (Methods).
We combine fate probability estimates with a pseudotemporal 
ordering to visualize gene expression programs executed by cells 
along trajectories leading to terminal states (Fig. 1e and Extended 
Data Fig. 1e–h; Methods). Pseudotime orders a progression of cell 
states from the initial state, while CellRank fate probabilities indi
-
cate how committed each cell is to every trajectory. By softly assign-
ing cells to trajectories via fate probabilities, we capture the effect 
of gradual lineage commitment, whereby cells transition from an 
uncommitted state (contribution to several trajectories) to a com
-
mitted state (contribution to a single trajectory) 21–23. Palantir 21, 
which is based on an iteratively refined shortest path in the space of 
diffusion components, is used for pseudotime ordering by default, 
where Palantir is provided with CellRank’s computed initial state. 
By correlating gene expression with fate probabilities, CellRank 
enhances the ability to uncover putative trajectory-specific regula
-
tors (Fig. 1f). By sorting putative regulators according to their peak 
in pseudotime, we visualize gene expression cascades specific to 
their cellular trajectory while accounting for the continuous nature 
of cellular fate commitment.
CellRank recapitulates coarse-state dynamics of pancreatic endo
-
crine lineage formation. We applied CellRank to an scRNA-seq 
dataset of E15.5 murine pancreatic development24. A UMAP25 rep-
resentation with original cluster annotations and scVelo-projected 
velocities recapitulated the main developmental trends
15 (Fig. 2a); 
from an initial cluster of endocrine progenitors (EPs) expressing 
low levels of the transcription factor neurogenin 3 (Neurog3 or 
Ngn3), cells traverse trajectories towards alpha, beta, epsilon and 
delta cell fates.
To investigate specific questions, such as the onset of lineage bias, 
precise location of initial and terminal states and probable progeni
-
tors of any terminal state, we argue against basing hypotheses purely 
on the projected velocity vectors, for three reasons. First, project -
ing onto only two or three dimensions may over-regularize the true 
velocities and lead to overly smooth vector fields. Interpreting cel
-
lular trajectories in two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional 
embeddings is often misleading, as high-dimensional distances 
cannot be fully preserved in lower dimensions; this is why most 
neighborhood-based dimensionality reduction techniques such as 
t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE)
26,27 and uni -
form manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) 28 do not 
conserve global relationships well 29–31. Second, visual interpreta -
tion of projected vectors ignores uncertainty in RNA velocity and 
therefore leads to overconfidence in the inferred trajectories. Third, 
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods160


[PDF_PAGE 3]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
velocities are available only locally, whereas CellRank aggregates 
these local signals globally, computing longer range trends. The 
single-cell field has reached a consensus that clustering cells in 2D 
or 3D representations must be avoided
32 and, similarly, we argue 
that velocity vectors projected onto two or three dimensions must 
not be used to address detailed questions of trajectory inference. 
CellRank overcomes these limitations and allows us to model global 
trajectories, as we demonstrate on pancreas data below.
Genes
Towards terminal
Pseudotime
b
c d
e
a
20,000 dimensions
pi,j =
exp(corr(vi, /uni03B4 i,j))
/uni2211k/uni2208/u1D4A9 i exp(corr(vi, /uni03B4 i,k))
ji /uni03B4 i,j 
/uni03B1
0.50.3
0.1
0.1
Velocity vector 
KNN graph
For each cell i
Terminal BInitial
Gene 1
Intermediate
Terminal A
Pseudotime
0 1 2 3 4
Gene 2
Expression
f
Transition probability 
among macrostates 
Transition probability 
among cells 0
0.04
BA
B
Fate probability B
A
Gene X
Gene Y
Gene Z
0
1
High
Low
Normalized gene
expression 
vi
Coarse-grain 
i
Fig. 1 | Combining RNA velocity with cell–cell similarity to determine initial and terminal states and compute a global map of cellular fate potential. 
a, 3D UMAP of 1,000 simulated cells with their velocity vectors, using DynGen66. Colors reflect DynGen ground truth branch assignment. CellRank models 
cell state transitions directly in high-dimensional gene expression space. b, A reference cell i with velocity vector vi and its nearest neighbors. The vector δi,j 
is the difference in gene expression between cells j and i. T o assign probability pi,j to cell i transitioning to cell j in the neighborhood Ni of cell i, we transform 
correlations between the transcriptomic difference vectors δi,j and the velocity vector vi, essentially considering the angle α between these vectors. c, The 
directed transition matrix is coarse-grained into four macrostates. Heatmaps show transition probabilities among cells (left) and macrostates (right); 
sorting cells according to macrostate membership recovers block structure in the cell–cell transition matrix. We recover initial, intermediate and two 
terminal states. The 30 colored cells are mostly likely to belong to each macrostate in the UMAP. d, For each cell, we compute its probability of reaching 
A or B. We show these fate probabilities in a fate map, where each cell is colored according to the terminal state it is most likely to reach. Color intensity 
reflects the degree of lineage priming. e, Using these fate probabilities and a pseudotime, we plot gene expression trends, which are specific to either A 
or B. Left, each cell is colored based on the expression of the indicated genes; right, respective trends along pseudotime towards each fate. f, expression 
trends in pseudotime of the top 50 genes whose expression correlates best with the probability of reaching B in a heatmap. Genes have been sorted 
according to their smoothed peak in pseudotime. One early gene (X), one intermediate gene (Y) and one late gene (Z) are highlighted by showing 
expression in the UMAP.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods 161


[PDF_PAGE 4]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
We computed CellRank’s directed transition matrix, and then 
coarse-grained it into 12 macrostates (Fig. 2b) based on eigen -
value gap analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1a,b), revealing a block-like 
structure in the transition matrix (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 
4a–c). Macrostates, annotated according to their overlap with the 
underlying gene expression clusters (Methods), comprised all 
developmental stages in this dataset, from an initial Ngn3
low EP 
state, to intermediate Ngn3 high EP and Fev+ states, to terminal 
hormone-producing alpha, beta, epsilon and delta cell states.
The three most stable states according to the coarse-grained 
transition matrix were alpha (SI 0.97), beta (SI 1.00) and epsilon (SI 
0.98) macrostates, which were accordingly labeled as terminal by 
CellRank, consistent with known biology (Fig. 2d). We recovered 
one relatively stable (SI 0.84) macrostate that largely overlapped with 
delta cells. We identified the Ngn3
low EP_1 state as initial because it 
was assigned the smallest CGSD value (2 × 10−6). The initial and ter-
minal states agree with the expression of well-known marker genes, 
including Ins1 and Ins2 for beta, Gcg for alpha, Ghrl for epsilon, Sst 
for delta cells and ductal cell markers Sox9, Anxa2 and Bicc1 for the 
initial state24,33 (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b).
We computed fate probabilities and summarized them in a fate 
map (Fig. 2e). This analysis correctly identified the beta cell fate 
as dominant in the Ngn3
high EP cluster at E15.5, consistent with 
known biology24 (Fig. 2e , inset), as also visualized with pie charts 
on a directed implementation of partition-based graph abstraction8 
(PAGA) (Supplementary Fig. 3; Methods). Using a cell in the Ngn3low 
EP_1 macrostate as the starting state for Palantir21, we ordered cells 
in pseudotime (Supplementary Fig. 4) and overlaid the expression 
of master regulators Arx
33 (alpha), Pdx134 (beta) and Hhex35 (delta), 
and the lineage-associated gene Irs436 (epsilon) (Fig. 2f) to visualize 
trends based on CellRank’s fate probabilities. All of these genes were 
upregulated correctly when approaching their associated terminal 
populations.
All components of CellRank are extremely robust to parameter 
variation, based on sensitivity analysis for the number of macro
-
states (Supplementary Fig. 5), weight given to transcriptomic simi-
larities, number of neighbors in the KNN graph, scVelo minimal 
gene counts, number of highly variable genes and number of princi-
pal components (PCs). CellRank is robust to random subsampling 
of cells (Supplementary Figs. 6 and 7).
b
c
d
a
f
Average fate among
Ngn3high EP cells
e
ii
iii
Beta
Epsilon
Delta
Low
High
Alpha
i
Pseudotime
ArxPdx1Irs4Hhex
0 1
0
2.0
0.2
1.0
0.5
0
0
0
Delta
Epsilon
Alpha
Beta Fev+
Ngn3low EP(1–3)
Ngn3high EP(1–4)
Ngn3low
EP(1–3)
Ngn3high
EP(1–4)
Epsilon
Alpha
Delta
Beta
Fev+
Transition probability 
among macrostates 
Initial
Terminal
Normalized gene
expression
Ngn3 low EP
Ngn3 high EP
Fev+
Beta
Alpha
Delta
Epsilon
Alpha 0.16
0.13
0.01
Beta 0.71
Epsilon
Delta
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Fig. 2 | Delineating fate choice in pancreatic development. a, UMAP of murine pancreatic development at e15.5 with scVelo-projected velocities, shown 
as streamlines. Colors correspond to published cluster annotations24. CellRank provides further insights regarding (i) the fate of early cells, (ii) the 
identification of terminal states and (iii) likely progenitors of terminal populations (boxed insets). b, Soft assignment of cells to macrostates. Cells colored 
by most probable macrostate; color intensity reflects degree of confidence, and gray cells reside between several macrostates. c, Coarse-grained transition 
probabilities among macrostates. T erminal macrostates are outlined in red and the initial Ngn3
low eP_1 macrostate is outlined in yellow. d, Highlight of the 
30 cells most confidently assigned to each initial and terminal macrostate, colored as in b. e, UMAP showing probabilities for reaching alpha, beta, epsilon 
and delta terminal fates. Fates colored as in b, with darker color indicating higher probability. Inset shows average fate probabilities of cells in the Ngn3
high 
eP cluster marked with a dashed line. f, Smoothed gene expression trends in pseudotime, each colored trend is weighted by CellRank fate probabilities as 
indicated for the lineage determinants Arx
33 (alpha), Pdx1 (ref. 34) (beta) and Hhex35 (delta) as well as the lineage-associated gene Irs4 (ref. 36) (epsilon). 
The trend for each gene is shown for each trajectory leading to the indicated terminal population. Right column, expression values for the corresponding 
gene in the UMAP.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods162


[PDF_PAGE 5]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
We used the pancreas dataset to investigate the effects of uncer-
tainty propagation (Extended Data Fig. 3d). We selected two cells, 
one from a low noise region where velocity vectors of neighbor -
ing cells tend to agree and one from a high noise region. To com -
pute transition probabilities towards nearest neighbors, we used a 
deterministic approach that does not propagate uncertainty, as well 
as our analytical approximation and MC sampling. Differences 
between deterministic and stochastic transition probabilities were 
greatest in the high noise region, highlighting that uncertainty 
propagation automatically downweights transitions towards cells in 
noisy areas where individual velocity vectors are less trustworthy 
(Extended Data Fig. 3e). We confirmed that our analytical approxi
-
mation and the asymptotically exact sampling scheme give similar 
results (Extended Data Fig. 3f,g). Overall, propagating uncertainty 
leads to increased robustness of fate probabilities (Supplementary 
Figs. 2, 8 and 9).
To evaluate whether CellRank can overcome situations in which 
the signals of differentiation and proliferation are confounded, 
we included a population of cycling ductal cells (Extended Data 
 
Fig. 6a,b). Coarse-grained transition probabilities among five 
macrostates automatically identified ductal and endocrine terminal 
states (Extended Data Fig. 6c–e), and fate probabilities towards the 
ductal and endocrine lineages correlated well with known lineage 
markers (Extended Data Fig. 6f–h).
CellRank identifies putative gene programs driving delta 
 
cell differentiation. Delta cells highlight how CellRank’s global 
approach overcomes limitations in RNA velocity. Delta cells 
are very rare in our data (70 cells or 3% of total; Supplementary 
Fig. 10) and, more importantly, no known drivers of delta cell 
development were among the 30 scVelo genes with highest 
likelihoods (Extended Data Fig. 7a). Moreover, genes implicated in 
delta cell development were not captured well by scVelo’s model of 
splicing kinetics (Extended Data Fig. 7b). We hypothesize that splic
-
ing kinetics fail to capture delta cell differentiation because these 
cells appear late in pancreatic development and thus are very rare 
in our data
37.
The development of delta cells is not well understood 33. Mature 
delta cells can be identified by Sst expression (Extended Data 
Fig. 5), but immature cells are much more difficult to identify. 
a
Pseudotime
Towards delta
b
c
d
Delta
Low
High
Delta fate probability
e Gene trend cluster 1
Nefl
Fev + beta
Fev + alpha
Fev + Pyy
Fev + delta
Fev + epsilon
To delta
Fate probability
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
Cd24a
Hhex
Hadh
Map2k4
Msi1
Normalized gene expression Low
High
Delta
Fev+ beta
Fev+ alpha
Fev+ delta
Fev+ epsilon
Fev+ Pyy
Atp1a2
1700019G17Rik
Xkr8
Rgs17
Scgn
Kcna5
Epb41l4a
Sst
Hadh
Rbp4
Gm13139
Slc16a10
Ghr
Fig. 3 | Zooming into the delta state to explain differentiation paths. a, Orthogonal subclustering of Fev+ hormone-negative endocrine cells from 
Bastidas-Ponce et al.24. Delta cells are indicated by the black outline. b, CellRank probabilities for acquiring the terminal delta cell fate. Cells are colored by 
the probability of reaching the delta state. Inset, group of cells likely to become delta, showing differentiation path predicted by CellRank. Fev+ subclusters 
are marked by outlines, colored as in a. Delta cells are marked with a black outline. c, CellRank probabilities in each Fev+ subcluster. Note that this does 
not include the delta cluster itself. Cells in the Fev+ delta subcluster are assigned significantly higher probability by CellRank (two-sided Welch’s t-test, 51 
Fev+ Delta cells versus 536 other Fev+ cells, t = 8.6, P = 1.7 × 10
−11; Methods). d, Smoothed gene expression trends of the top 50 genes whose expression 
values correlate best with delta fate probabilities, sorted according to peak in pseudotime. Not all gene names are shown (see Supplementary Fig. 11 for 
full list). Right, UMAP projected MAGIC
67 imputed expression values of Hhex and Cd24a, examples of known regulators that were identified automatically, 
as well as of Hadh. e, Smoothed gene expression trends along the delta lineage for all 12,987 genes that are expressed in at least ten cells, clustered using 
louvain
68. Cluster 1 contains transiently upregulated genes. The solid line denotes mean trend, dashed lines denote 1 s.d. Genes in cluster 1 are sorted 
according to their correlation with delta fate probabilities. Right, expression on the UMAP of Map2k4, Msi1 and Nefl, among the genes that correlated best.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods 163


[PDF_PAGE 6]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Hhex is the only widely accepted transcription factor required to 
maintain delta cell differentiation, and specifically marks delta cells 
in the adult islets of Langerhans 35, and Cd24a has recently been 
implicated in human delta cell development 38,39. To learn more 
about delta cell development, we focused on CellRank fate proba -
bilities towards the relatively stable delta macrostate (SI 0.84), which 
was not automatically classified as terminal
33 (Fig. 3a,b). Velocities 
projected onto the UMAP do not disclose likely delta cell precur -
sors (Extended Data Fig. 8), but CellRank fate probabilities show 
one path with highest likelihood, through cells that were annotated 
as delta precursors in a study
24 involving subclustering of the Fev+ 
population (Fig. 3c). Therefore, while RNA velocity fails to cap -
ture the dynamics of delta cell development, they can be recovered 
successfully by CellRank because it constrains velocities to the 
a
b c
d
e
Apoa1 Col1a2Day Cluster
t-SNE2t-SNE1
i
ii
Successful
Dead-end
versus
Low
High
Fate probability to
successfully reprogram
Reprogramming
Dead-end
f
Dead-end
Successful
0
2_1
2_2
1
3
0 2_1 2_2 1 3
Macrostates
Frequency
30
15
0 2_1 2_2 1 3
Macrostates
False positive rate
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
True positive rate
CellRank fate probabilities versus ground-truth CellTag labels
By ‘day’ By ‘cluster’
Day 12 (AUC = 0.84)
Day 15 (AUC = 0.91)
Day 21 (AUC = 0.94)
6
9
12
15
21 6
3
028
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
4
2
0
Fig. 4 | CellRank predicts reprogramming outcome. a, t-SNe26,27 embeddings of 48,515 MeFs reprogramming to iePs48,69. each dot represents a 
cell, colored by day after reprogramming induction by retroviral overexpression of Foxa1 and Hnf4a49; expression of ieP marker Apoa1, indicative of 
reprogramming success; expression of MeF marker Col1a2, indicative of reprogramming failure; or original cluster annotations from Biddy et al.49. Clusters 
1 and 3 (dashed lines) represent successful and dead-end states, respectively49. b, scVelo15 velocities, projected on the t-SNe embedding in a and shown 
as streamlines. Velocities do not disclose a route towards successful reprogramming (i) and falsely show a transition from successful to dead-end states 
(ii). c, CellRank-computed macrostates, colored by cluster from a that they mostly overlap with. d, Distribution over reprogramming day (left) and cluster 
(right), colored by the same labels as in a. Macrostates 1 and 3 contain only late-stage cells (days 21 and 28) from clusters 1 and 3, respectively, thus 
representing the successful and dead-end states. e, CellRank’s fate probabilities towards the successful macrostate 1 (top) and ground truth labels from 
CellT agging
49 lineage tracing (bottom). For 3,049 cells across all days in the time course, these labels show the likely reprogramming outcome49. f, AUC 
of CellRank fate probabilities at days 12, 15 and 21, based on classifiers trained to predict reprogramming outcome using CellT ag labels (e) as ground truth 
(Methods).
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods164


[PDF_PAGE 7]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
phenotypic manifold via the KNN graph, incorporates cell–cell 
similarly and models long-range trends.
To discover more delta genes, we correlated gene expression 
values in the Fev+ cluster against CellRank delta fate probabili -
ties (Methods). Smoothed gene expression trends for the 50 genes 
with highest correlation showed a cascade of gene activation events 
 
(Fig. 3d and Supplementary Fig. 11). Among the top 50 genes are 
Hhex and Cd24, as well as Sst, the hormone produced by mature 
delta cells33. Genes with no previously described role in delta cell 
differentiation include Hadh (a target of Foxa2 , implicated in 
pancreatic differentiation 40), Isl1 (a transcription factor involved 
in pancreatic differentiation 41) and Pkhd1 (a target of Hnf1a/b 42, 
transcription factors involved in pancreatic differentiation43). Next, 
we focused on a cluster of transiently upregulated genes (Fig. 3e). 
When ranked by their correlation with delta fate, we identified 
Map2k4, Msi1 and Nefl as new candidate regulators. Msi1 is regu
-
lated by Rfx4 (ref. 44), which is a paralog of Rfx6 that is structur -
ally related to Rfx3 (ref. 45), both of which are involved in endocrine 
differentiation46,47.
Lineage tracing supports fate probabilities in reprogramming. 
The pancreas example demonstrated how CellRank can be used 
to study differentiation trajectories during normal development. 
Moving to a perturbation scenario, we applied CellRank to a data
-
set of 48,515 mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) reprogramming 
towards induced endoderm progenitors
48 (iEPs) across six time -
points49 (Methods). Only around 1% of cells are expected to repro -
gram successfully (marked by Apoa1), while the other cells enter a 
‘dead-end’ state (marked by Col1a2) 49 (Fig. 4a). This dataset con -
tains CellTagging lineage tracing information that can be used to 
reconstruct clonal relationships across cells, thus providing ground 
truth on the ultimate fate (successful versus dead-end) of early 
cells
49. We were interested to see how well CellRank’s fate probabili-
ties recovered ground truth in this challenging setting.
We computed velocities using scVelo 15 and projected them on 
the original t-SNE embedding of Biddy et al. 49 (Fig. 4b). Projected 
velocities failed to show a path towards the successful state, most 
likely because the reprogramming signal is too weak to be picked 
up in such low dimensions. CellRank’s macrostates, in contrast, 
included both a dead-end and the rare successful state (Fig. 4c,d). 
By computing fate probabilities towards these states and compar -
ing them with lineage-tracing derived labels (Fig. 4e; Methods), we 
found that fate probabilities were highly predictive of reprogram
-
ming outcome and that predictive accuracy decreased for earlier 
days in the time course, as expected (Fig. 4f).
CellRank outperforms competing methods. To evaluate the 
impact of including velocity information, we benchmarked 
CellRank with similarity-based methods that provide cell-fate prob
-
abilities (Palantir21, STEMNET50 and FateID51) and a velocity-based 
method that computes initial/terminal states (velocyto 14) on the 
pancreas data (Supplementary Note 2). Only CellRank correctly 
identified both initial and terminal states (Fig. 5a). Palantir requires 
user-provided initial states and identified only two out of four ter
-
minal states, and STEMNET and FateID cannot determine either 
initial or terminal states. Velocyto cannot identify individual initial 
or terminal states, but outputs distributions for initial and terminal 
states which only overlap with beta and Ngn3
low EP cells, respec -
tively. Next, we supplied all methods with CellRank’s terminal 
states and tested cell-fate probabilities, finding that only CellRank 
and Palantir correctly identified beta as the dominant fate among 
Ngn3
high EP cells (Fig. 5b). Velocyto does not provide fate proba -
bilities. For lineage-specific gene expression, CellRank and Palantir 
correctly predicted trends for key lineage drivers, whereas FateID 
failed to predict (transient) upregulation of Pdx1 and Pax4 along 
the beta lineage
33 as well as upregulation of Arx along the alpha lin-
eage33. STEMNET and velocyto do not provide expression trends 
(Fig. 5c and Supplementary Figs. 12–14).
We also benchmarked runtime and memory usage on an 
scRNA-seq dataset of 100,000 cells reprogramming from MEFs to 
iEPs49 (Fig. 5d and Supplementary Note 2). It took CellRank about 
33 s to compute macrostates from this large dataset (Supplementary 
Table 1). For fate probabilities, the (generalized) linear model 
STEMNET was fastest as expected, taking only 1 min, while 
CellRank took about 2 min and Palantir took 1 h 12 min. FateID 
on 90,000 cells took even longer and failed on 100,000 cells due 
to memory constraints, whereas velocyto was the slowest, exceed -
ing our time budget of 10,000 s for cell numbers exceeding 40,000. 
Memory usage results looked similar, with CellRank requiring 
three- and five-times less peak memory than Palantir and FateID, 
respectively, to compute fate probabilities on 100,000 cells (Fig. 5e 
and Supplementary Table 2). Only STEMNET required even less 
memory. Velocyto was most memory-hungry, requiring more 
memory on 40,000 cells than any other method on 100,000 cells. On 
100,000 cells without parallelization, CellRank had a peak memory 
usage of less than 15 GiB, making it possible to run such large cell 
numbers on a laptop (Supplementary Table 3).
Fate probabilities predict a new dedifferentiation trajectory in 
lung regeneration. To demonstrate CellRank’s ability in the con
-
text of regeneration, where the typical assumption of unidirectional 
transition to more differentiated states does not hold, we applied 
it to murine lung regeneration in response to acute injury
52. The 
scRNA-seq dataset comprised 24,882 lung airway and alveolar 
epithelial cells, sequenced at 13 timepoints spanning days 2–15 
after bleomycin injury (Extended Data Fig. 9a,b) with Drop-seq
53, 
a lower resolution single-cell platform. A high degree of plastic -
ity between epithelial cell types has been observed when homeo -
stasis is perturbed and the tissue environment changes, including 
injury-induced reprogramming of differentiated cell types to bona 
fide long-lived stem cells in the lung
54 and other organs 55. In the 
current airway cell lineage model, multipotent basal cells give 
Fig. 5 | CellRank outperforms other cell-fate inference methods. a–c, Methods were compared on pancreas data. CellRank automatically identified the 
terminal alpha, beta and epsilon states as well as the initial Ngn3low eP state (a). Delta cells were picked up as a macrostate and given the terminal label 
manually. Palantir21 identified terminal beta and delta states. The velocyto14 state distribution is depicted as overlapping with beta (terminal, orange) and 
Ngn3low eP (initial, yellow) cells, respectively (Supplementary Note 2). Only CellRank and Palantir correctly predict beta to be the dominant fate among 
Ngn3high eP cells (b). Velocyto does not compute fate probabilities. Gene expression trends for the beta-regulator Pdx134,70,71 (c). On the x axis is the 
pseudotime used by the corresponding method, on the y axis is gene expression. For FateID51, the x axis is given by the cell indices, which are assigned to 
the beta lineage, sorted by DPT7. We show one smoothed trend per lineage for CellRank and Palantir, and a smoothed trend along just the beta lineage 
for FateID because it does not allow one gene to be visualized simultaneously along several lineages. CellRank and Palantir correctly identify upregulation 
of Pdx1 along the beta lineage. FateID fails to do so while STeMNeT
50 and velocyto do not offer options to visualize lineage-specific gene expression 
trends (Supplementary Note 2). d,e, Boxplots comparing methods in terms of computational runtime (d) and peak memory usage (e) on a 100,000 
cell reprogramming dataset
49 (Supplementary Note 2). We split the datasets into ten subsets of increasing size and ran each method ten times on each 
subset. Boxes cover 25% to 75% quantiles, line indicates median, whiskers extend to 1.5× the interquartile range, and dots represent outliers; dashed lines 
connect the medians. CellRank’s peak memory usages for initial/terminal states and fate probabilities are very similar and thus the lines overlap.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods 165


[PDF_PAGE 8]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
rise to club cells, which in turn can give rise to secretory goblet and 
ciliated cells56. It has been shown that upon ablation of basal stem 
cells, luminal secretory cells can dedifferentiate into fully functional 
basal stem cells
54. Here, we applied CellRank for unbiased discovery 
of unexpected regeneration trajectories among airway cells.
We computed scVelo velocities, applied CellRank and identi -
fied nine macrostates that were used to compute fate probabilities 
(Fig. 6a,b). Fate probabilities assigned high multilineage potential 
to MHC-II+ club cells, as previously reported
52 (Fig. 6c). Focusing 
our analysis on airway cells, we identified three macrostates in 
Palantir pseudotime0 1
0.5
1.0
Pdx1
a b c
CellRankPalantirFateIDSTEMNET
Not available
Initial and terminal states Fate probabilities Gene expression trends
Not available
d
Not available
0 1Palantir pseudotime
0
1.5
Pdx1Pdx1
Velocyto
Ngn3 low EP (I)
Delta (T)
Epsilon (T)
Alpha (T)
Beta (T)
Beta (T)
Delta (T)
Not available Not available
Initial
Terminal
e
10 20 30 40 50 60
Number of cells (thousands)
70 80 90 100
104
103
102
101
100
Runtime (s)
10 20 30 40 50 60
Number of cells (thousands)
70 80 90 100
200
175
150
125
Memory (GB)
100
75
50
25
0
Runtime (s) Peak memory usage
CellRank (initial/terminal and 
fate probabilities)
CellRank (fate probabilities)
CellRank (initial/terminal)
FateID (fate probabilities)
Palantir (fate probabilities)
STEMNET (fate probabilities)
Velocyto (initial/terminal)
Alpha 0.22
0.50
0.09
Beta 0.19
Epsilon
Delta
Alpha 0.06
0.29
0.62
Beta 0.03
Epsilon
Delta
Alpha 0.27
0.10
0.01
Beta 0.62
Epsilon
Delta
Alpha 0.16
0.13
0.01
Beta 0.71
Epsilon
Delta
DPT-sorted cells
0
1.0
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods166


[PDF_PAGE 9]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Fig. 6 | CellRank predicts a new dedifferentiation trajectory in murine lung regeneration. a, UMAP of 24,882 epithelial cells from 13 timepoints, spanning 
days 2–15 after lung injury by bleomycin treatment in mice colored according to original cluster annotations52. Streamlines show averaged and projected 
scVelo velocities and the box highlights a subset of airway cells. b, CellRank-computed macrostates, showing the 30 most confidently assigned cells for 
each state. Names and colors were assigned to macrostates according to the clusters from a that they overlapped most with. c, Circular projection
50,72 
of cells according to fate probabilities towards the macrostates shown in b, colored by cluster annotations from a. Macrostates are arranged on the 
edge of a circle; each cell is placed inside the circle according to its probability of reaching any of the terminal states (Methods). Cells in the center have 
higher multilineage potential, whereas cells closer to one of the corners are committed. Boxes highlight goblet cells likely to reach the basal terminal 
state (i), MHC-II+ club cells with high multilineage potential (ii) and club cells likely to transition to ciliated cells (iii). d, Cells in UMAP colored by 
CellRank-computed fate probabilities towards the basal cell macrostate, showing a route from goblet to basal cells. e, CellRank fate probabilities and 
Palantir pseudotime
21 are used to define three stages of the dedifferentiation trajectory (top, Methods). Dedifferentiation stages are characterized by 
expression of Bpifb1 (goblet), Krt5 (early basal) and Trp63 (late basal); stage 1 corresponds to goblet, stage 2 to intermediate and stage 3 to basal cells 
(bottom). f, Immunofluorescence stainings for Bpifb1 (green), Krt5 (red), T rp63 (white) and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (blue) in mouse lung tissue 
sections 10 days after bleomycin injury. We find cells from the intermediate stage 2 (Bpfib1+/Krt5+/T rp63–) in bleomycin-injured lungs (yellow squares 
and arrow heads). Scale bars, 50 μm; 10 μm for enlarged images. In each panel, dotted-line boxes are magnified at the bottom, and solid-line boxed cells 
are magnified to the right, showing individual and merged channels. Representative images are derived from two independent biological replicates. g, 
Quantification of cell abundances by stage in wild type (PBS), 10 days after bleomycin injury (bleo d10) and 22 days postinjury (bleo d22) mice. T en 
independent pulmonary airway regions per condition examined over two biologically independent experiments were quantified. Bleo d10 is significantly 
enriched for stage 2 cells (nested one-way analysis of variance with T ukey’s multiple comparison test, P < 10
−3).
e
a b
f
g
UMAP1UMAP2
c
Basal
Goblet
Basal 
probability 
d
Pseudotime
Basal probability
0 1
0
1 Stage 1 
Stage 2 Stage 3
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Bpifb1
Krt5
Trp63
Bpifb1–/Krt5+/Trp63+ (%)
40
30
20
10
0
PBS
Bleo d10
Bleo d22
Stage 3
Bpifb1+/Krt5–/Trp63– (%)
PBS
Bleo d10
Bleo d22
Stage 1
Bpifb1+/Krt5+/Trp63– (%)
Stage 2
P < 0.001 P < 0.001
Ciliated
AT2
AT1
Krt8+ ADI
Intrapulmonary 
airway
50 µm 
Bpifb1 
Krt5
Trp63
DAPI
Merge
50 µm 
Merge
Bpfib1 
Krt5
Trp63
DAPI
Bpifb1 Krt5 Trp63 DAPI
Bpifb1 Krt5 Trp63 DAPI
Bleomycin day 10
i
ii
iii
PBS
Bleo d10
Bleo d22
8
6
4
2
0
60
50
40
30
20
0.8
0.4
0
Basal
Goblet
Club-activated
Club
Club to ciliated
MHC-II+ club
Fraction of cells
in group (%)
Ciliated
Goblet
Basal
Mki67+ Proliferation
AT2-activated
Krt8+ ADI
Neuroendocrine
Ciliated-activated_2
Ciliated-activated_1
Mean expression
in group
20 40
0.5 1.0
60 80
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods 167


[PDF_PAGE 10]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
ciliated cells, one in basal cells and one in goblet cells. In agreement 
with lineage tracing experiments 57, we observed a high probabil -
ity for club cells to give rise to ciliated cells (Fig. 6c). The goblet 
cell macrostate was distinguished from club cells by the expres
-
sion of specific mucin genes such as Muc5b and Muc5ac, as well 
as secreted proteins involved in innate immunity, such as Bpifb1 
(Extended Data Fig. 9c). Analysis of fate probabilities towards basal 
and goblet states showed that goblet cells are likely to dedifferen
-
tiate towards Krt5+/Trp63+ basal cells (Fig. 6c,d and Extended 
Data Fig. 10).
We computed a diffusion map on basal and goblet cells alone to 
study the trajectory at higher resolution (Supplementary Fig. 15a). 
We confirmed that the fraction of basal cells increases over time 
and that gene-wise velocities support the dedifferentiation hypoth
-
esis (Supplementary Fig. 15b,c). Using CellRank and the CGSD, we 
identified early cells in the transition, from which we computed a 
pseudotime using Palantir (Supplementary Fig. 16). We combined 
pseudotime with the probability of transitioning towards the basal 
fate to define stages in the dedifferentiation trajectory in the data 
subset (Fig. 6e), splitting cells with at least 66% probability of reach
-
ing the basal state into three equal pseudotime bins. Stage 1 consists 
of goblet cells characterized by high expression of goblet marker 
Bpifb1. Stage 2 comprises an intermediate set of cells that express 
both Bpifb1 and basal marker Krt5. Stage 3 consists of terminal basal 
cells, characterized by basal markers Krt5 and Trp63, and no expres
-
sion of Bpifb1 (Fig. 6e).
Our new goblet cell dedifferentiation model predicts that, after 
injury, the frequency of stage 2 cells should increase as these rep -
resent intermediate cells in the dedifferentiation bridge towards 
basal cells. To validate this prediction, we assessed Bpifb1, Krt5 and 
Trp63 expression by immunofluorescence of mouse airway epithe
-
lial cells at days 10 and 21 after bleomycin treatment, as well as in 
untreated animals. Cells from stage 1 (goblet) and stage 3 (basal) 
were found in both control and treated mice. However, intermedi -
ate stage 2 cells were found only in 10-day post-treatment mice (Fig. 
6f,g). Furthermore, we also found triple-positive cells, but these 
appeared only after injury (Supplementary Fig. 17). Goblet cell 
hyperplasia—an increase in the number of mucous secreting cells 
in the airways—is a prominent feature in several chronic inflamma
-
tory conditions58. The new dedifferentiation trajectory to basal stem 
cells that CellRank analysis predicted is unexpected, suggesting a 
route for generating multipotent stem cells in the resolution phase 
of the regenerative response to injury.
Discussion
We have shown that CellRank combines gene expression similar -
ity with RNA velocity to robustly estimate directed cellular trajec -
tories in development, reprogramming and regeneration across 
experimental platforms (10x and Drop-seq). Applied to pancreatic 
development, CellRank outperformed existing methods by accu
-
rately recovering initial and terminal states, fate potentials and gene 
expression trends, efficiently computing terminal states (seconds) 
and fate potentials (few minutes) on 100,000 cells. Similarity-based 
trajectory approaches have been limited mainly to studying biologi
-
cal processes in which the starting cell and direction are clear. In 
contrast, CellRank generalizes beyond normal development, suc -
cessfully recovering lineage-derived ground truth during in vitro 
fibroblast reprogramming and predicting a new goblet-to-basal 
cell dedifferentiation trajectory upon lung injury. We validated the 
existence of a new intermediate state between goblet and basal cells 
experimentally, although the direction of the proposed trajectory 
still needs to be confirmed with lineage tracing.
CellRank includes a number of innovations, including uncer
-
tainty propagation and high-dimensional vector field analysis. Other 
approaches attempting vector field analysis have either ignored 
the stochastic nature of fate decisions and velocity uncertainty
59, 
or do not focus on trajectory reconstruction 60. The original velo -
cyto14 model proposed to find initial and terminal states by simu -
lating a Markov process forwards or backwards in time; however, 
that implementation relied on a 2D t-SNE embedding that does not 
adhere to the phenotypic manifold or enable separation into indi
-
vidual initial and terminal states.
RNA velocity vectors are noisy estimates of the current state of 
gene regulation. CellRank takes care of uncertain velocity vectors 
by propagating their distribution in a manner that scales with local 
noise level and increases robustness. A current limitation is that we 
need to compute moments over velocity vectors in the local neigh
-
borhood to approximate their distribution. In future, we predict an 
end-to-end framework that propagates uncertainty from raw counts 
to end-state assignments and fate probabilities. We note that if the 
velocity vectors are systematically biased (for example, due to driver 
genes with insufficient unspliced reads to estimate their kinetics), 
then computed fate probabilities will reflect these biases, despite 
uncertainty propagation.
In contrast to previous Markov chain-based methods
7, our 
approach is based on a directed nonsymmetric transition matrix. 
Eigenvectors of nonsymmetric transition matrices are generally 
complex and do not permit a physical interpretation, implying that 
it would not be possible to apply the eigendecomposition to learn 
about aggregate dynamics. This could be addressed using compu
-
tationally expensive simulation-based approaches, but CellRank 
takes a more principled approach based on the real Schur decom
-
position—a generalization of the eigendecomposition to nondiago-
nalizable matrices.
In the pancreas data, CellRank identified alpha, beta and epsilon 
states automatically, but the delta macrostate required us to manu-
ally assign terminal status, likely because delta cells are rare in this 
dataset and their regulation is not detected correctly by velocities. 
To overcome the deficiencies of splicing data, it may be possible to 
extend the CellRank model to epigenetic information such as chro
-
matin accessibility, leveraging the directional information coded by 
the typical delay between epigenetic and transcriptional changes61,62. 
Such information could be included by introducing limited mem -
ory to the Markov chain.
For delta cell development, we showed how gene expression can 
be correlated with fate probabilities to identify putative driver genes. 
Alternatively, drivers could be identified through statistical tests on 
the parameters of the generalized additive models (GAMS) used 
for fitting lineage-specific gene expression trends. Existing models 
could benefit from CellRank fate probabilities for assigning cells 
to lineages
63. Further studies are needed to validate our new pro -
posed markers for delta cell differentiation. We anticipate applying 
this framework to demonstrate its use on cycling cells and cancer 
contexts.
CellRank could also be extended by using temporal information, 
such as timepoints in the lung dataset
52, to regularize the model, 
by only allowing transitions consistent with experimental time 64. 
Further, lineage tracing information could regularize the model to 
obey clonal dynamics
65. CellRank could also be easily applied to data 
from metabolic labeling4–6. As a general framework for interpreting 
high-dimensional vector fields, we anticipate that CellRank will be 
useful to describe complex trajectories in regeneration, reprogram
-
ming and cancer, where determining the direction of the process is 
often challenging.
online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Research report -
ing summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary infor -
mation, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of 
author contributions and competing interests; and statements of 
data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41592-021-01346-6.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods168


[PDF_PAGE 11]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Received: 19 October 2020; Accepted: 7 November 2021; 
Published online: 13 January 2022
References
 1. Bendall, S. C. et al. Single-cell trajectory detection uncovers progression 
and regulatory coordination in human B cell development. Cell 157, 
714–725 (2014).
 2. Baron, C. S. & van Oudenaarden, A. Unravelling cellular relationships 
during development and regeneration using genetic lineage tracing. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 753–765 (2019).
 3. Wagner, D. E. & Klein, A. M. Lineage tracing meets single-cell omics: 
opportunities and challenges. Nat. Rev. Genet. 21, 410–427 (2020).
 4. Erhard, F . et al. scSLAM-seq reveals core features of transcription dynamics 
in single cells. Nature 571, 419–423 (2019).
 5. Battich, N. et al. Sequencing metabolically labeled transcripts in single cells 
reveals mRNA turnover strategies. Science 367, 1151–1156 (2020).
 6. Qiu, Q. et al. Massively parallel and time-resolved RNA sequencing in 
single cells with scNT-seq. Nat. Methods 17, 991–1001 (2020).
 7. Haghverdi, L., Büttner, M., Wolf, F . A., Buettner, F . & Theis, F . J. Diffusion 
pseudotime robustly reconstructs lineage branching. Nat. Methods 13, 
845–848 (2016).
 8. Wolf, F . A. et al. PAGA: graph abstraction reconciles clustering with 
trajectory inference through a topology preserving map of single cells. 
Genome Biol. 20, 59 (2019).
 9. Setty, M. et al. Wishbone identifies bifurcating developmental trajectories 
from single-cell data. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 637–645 (2016).
 10. Qiu, X. et al. Reversed graph embedding resolves complex single-cell 
trajectories. Nat. Methods 14, 979–982 (2017).
 11. Saelens, W ., Cannoodt, R., Todorov, H. & Saeys, Y . A comparison of single- 
cell trajectory inference methods. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 547–554 (2019).
 12. Trapnell, C. et al. The dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions are 
revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 
381–386 (2014).
 13. Weinreb, C., Wolock, S., Tusi, B. K., Socolovsky, M. & Klein, A. M. 
Fundamental limits on dynamic inference from single-cell snapshots. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 115, E2467–E2476 (2018).
 14. La Manno, G. et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494–498 (2018).
 15. Bergen, V ., Lange, M., Peidli, S., Wolf, F . A. & Theis, F . J. Generalizing RNA 
velocity to transient cell states through dynamical modeling. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 38, 1408–1414 (2020).
 16. Gorin, G., Svensson, V . & Pachter, L. Protein velocity and acceleration from 
single-cell multiomics experiments. Genome Biol. 21, 39 (2020).
 17. Schiebinger, G. et al. Optimal-transport analysis of single-cell gene 
expression identifies developmental trajectories in reprogramming. Cell 176, 
1517 (2019).
 18. Fischer, D. S. et al. Inferring population dynamics from single-cell 
RNA-sequencing time series data. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 461–468 (2019).
 19. Reuter, B., Fackeldey, K. & Weber, M. Generalized Markov modeling of 
nonreversible molecular kinetics. J. Chem. Phys. 150, 174103 (2019).
 20. Reuter, B., Weber, M., Fackeldey, K., Röblitz, S. & Garcia, M. E. Generalized 
Markov state modeling method for nonequilibrium biomolecular dynamics: 
exemplified on amyloid β conformational dynamics driven by an oscillating 
electric field. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14, 3579–3594 (2018).
 21. Setty, M. et al. Characterization of cell fate probabilities in single-cell data 
with Palantir. Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 451–460 (2019).
 22. Buenrostro, J. D. et al. Integrated single-cell analysis maps the continuous 
regulatory landscape of human hematopoietic differentiation. Cell 173, 
1535–1548.e16 (2018).
 23. Stergachis, A. B. et al. Developmental fate and cellular maturity encoded in 
human regulatory DNA landscapes. Cell 154, 888–903 (2013).
 24. Bastidas-Ponce, A. et al. Comprehensive single cell mRNA profiling reveals 
a detailed roadmap for pancreatic endocrinogenesis. Development 146, dev. 
173849 (2019).
 25. Becht, E. et al. Dimensionality reduction for visualizing single-cell data 
using UMAP . Nat. Biotechnol. 37, 38–44 (2019).
 26. Maaten, Lvander & Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-SNE. J. Mach. 
Learn. Res. 9, 2579–2605 (2008).
 27. Amir, E.-A. D. et al. viSNE enables visualization of high dimensional 
single-cell data and reveals phenotypic heterogeneity of leukemia. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 31, 545–552 (2013).
 28. McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. UMAP: uniform manifold 
approximation and projection for dimension reduction. Preprint at arXiv 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426 (2018).
 29. Heiser, C. N. & Lau, K. S. A quantitative framework for evaluating 
single-cell data structure preservation by dimensionality reduction 
techniques. Cell Rep. 31, 107576 (2020).
 30. Kobak, D. & Linderman, G. C. Initialization is critical for preserving global 
data structure in both t-SNE and UMAP . Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 156–157 (2021).
 31. Cooley, S. M., Hamilton, T., Deeds, E. J. & Ray, J. C. J. A novel metric 
reveals previously unrecognized distortion in dimensionality reduction of 
scRNA-Seq data. Preprint at bioRxiv https://www.biorxiv.org/
content/10.1101/689851v1 (2019).
 32. Luecken, M. D. & Theis, F . J. Current best practices in single-cell RNA-seq 
analysis: a tutorial. Mol. Syst. Biol. 15, e8746 (2019).
 33. Bastidas-Ponce, A., Scheibner, K., Lickert, H. & Bakhti, M. Cellular and 
molecular mechanisms coordinating pancreas development. Development 
144, 2873–2888 (2017).
 34. Bastidas-Ponce, A. et al. Foxa2 and Pdx1 cooperatively regulate postnatal 
maturation of pancreatic β-cells. Mol. Metab. 6, 524–534 (2017).
 35. Zhang, J., McKenna, L. B., Bogue, C. W . & Kaestner, K. H. The diabetes 
gene Hhex maintains δ-cell differentiation and islet function. Genes Dev. 28, 
829–834 (2014).
 36. Krentz, N. A. J. et al. Single-cell transcriptome profiling of mouse and 
hESC-derived pancreatic progenitors. Stem Cell Rep. 11, 1551–1564 (2018).
 37. Johansson, K. A. et al. Temporal control of neurogenin3 activity in pancreas 
progenitors reveals competence windows for the generation of different 
endocrine cell types. Dev. Cell 12, 457–465 (2007).
 38. Berthault, C., Staels, W . & Scharfmann, R. Purification of pancreatic 
endocrine subsets reveals increased iron metabolism in beta cells. Mol. 
Metab. 42, 101060 (2020).
 39. Cram, D. S., McIntosh, A., Oxbrow, L., Johnston, A. M. & DeAizpurua, H. 
J. Differential mRNA display analysis of two related but functionally distinct 
rat insulinoma (RIN) cell lines: identification of CD24 and its expression in 
the developing pancreas. Differentiation 64, 237–246 (1999).
 40. Lee, K. et al. FOXA2 is required for enhancer priming during pancreatic 
differentiation. Cell Rep. 28, 382–393.e7 (2019).
 41. Ahlgren, U., Pfaff, S. L., Jessell, T. M., Edlund, T. & Edlund, H. Independent 
requirement for ISL1 in formation of pancreatic mesenchyme and islet cells. 
Nature 385, 257–260 (1997).
 42. Hiesberger, T. et al. Mutation of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta inhibits 
Pkhd1 gene expression and produces renal cysts in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 113, 
814–825 (2004).
 43. Haumaitre, C. et al. Lack of TCF2/vHNF1 in mice leads to pancreas 
agenesis. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 102, 1490–1495 (2005).
 44. Kawase, S. et al. Regulatory factor X transcription factors control Musashi1 
transcription in mouse neural stem/progenitor cells. Stem Cells Dev. 23, 
2250–2261 (2014).
 45. Emery, P ., Durand, B., Mach, B. & Reith, W . RFX proteins, a novel family of 
DNA binding proteins conserved in the eukaryotic kingdom. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 24, 803–807 (1996).
 46. Ait-Lounis, A. et al. The transcription factor Rfx3 regulates beta-cell 
differentiation, function, and glucokinase expression. Diabetes 59, 
1674–1685 (2010).
 47. Smith, S. B. et al. Rfx6 directs islet formation and insulin production in 
mice and humans. Nature 463, 775–780 (2010).
 48. Morris, S. A. et al. Dissecting engineered cell types and enhancing cell fate 
conversion via CellNet. Cell 158, 889–902 (2014).
 49. Biddy, B. A. et al. Single-cell mapping of lineage and identity in direct 
reprogramming. Nature 564, 219–224 (2018).
 50. Velten, L. et al. Human haematopoietic stem cell lineage commitment is a 
continuous process. Nat. Cell Biol. 19, 271–281 (2017).
 51. Herman, J. S., Sagar & Grün, D. FateID infers cell fate bias in multipotent 
progenitors from single-cell RNA-seq data. Nat. Methods 15, 379–386 (2018).
 52. Strunz, M. et al. Alveolar regeneration through a Krt8 transitional stem cell 
state that persists in human lung fibrosis. Nat. Commun. 11, 3559 (2020).
 53. Macosko, E. Z. et al. Highly parallel genome-wide expression profiling of 
individual cells using nanoliter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214 (2015).
 54. Tata, P . R. et al. Dedifferentiation of committed epithelial cells into stem 
cells in vivo. Nature 503, 218–223 (2013).
 55. Tetteh, P . W ., Farin, H. F . & Clevers, H. Plasticity within stem cell 
hierarchies in mammalian epithelia. Trends Cell Biol. 25, 100–108 (2015).
 56. Weinberger, S. E., Cockrill, B. A. & Mandel, J. Principles of Pulmonary 
Medicine. (Saunders/Elsevier, 2008).
 57. Hogan, B. L. M. et al. Repair and regeneration of the respiratory system: 
complexity, plasticity, and mechanisms of lung stem cell function. Cell Stem 
Cell 15, 123–138 (2014).
 58. Rock, J. R., Randell, S. H. & Hogan, B. L. M. Airway basal stem cells: a 
perspective on their roles in epithelial homeostasis and remodeling. 
Dis. Model. Mech. 3, 545–556 (2010).
 59. Qiu, X. et al. Mapping transcriptomic vector fields of single cells. Preprint 
at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/696724 (2021).
 60. Kimmel, J. C., Yi, N., Roy, M., Hendrickson, D. G. & Kelley, D. R. 
Differentiation reveals latent features of aging and an energy barrier in 
murine myogenesis. Cell Rep. 35, 109046 (2021).
 61. Weinreb, C., Rodriguez-Fraticelli, A., Camargo, F . D. & Klein, A. M. 
Lineage tracing on transcriptional landscapes links state to fate during 
differentiation. Science 367, eaaw3381 (2020).
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods 169


[PDF_PAGE 12]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
 62. Ranzoni, A. M. et al. Integrative single-cell RNA-seq and ATAC-seq analysis 
of human developmental hematopoiesis. Cell Stem Cell 28, 472–487.e7 (2021).
 63. Van den Berge, K. et al. Trajectory-based differential expression analysis for 
single-cell sequencing data. Nat. Commun. 11, 1201 (2020).
 64. Nowotschin, S. et al. The emergent landscape of the mouse gut endoderm 
at single-cell resolution. Nature 569, 361–367 (2019).
 65. Forrow, A. & Schiebinger, G. LineageOT is a unified framework for lineage 
tracing and trajectory inference. Nat. Commun. 12, 4940 (2021).
 66. Cannoodt, R., Saelens, W ., Deconinck, L. & Saeys, Y . Spearheading future 
omics analyses using dyngen, a multi-modal simulator of single cells. Nat. 
Commun. 12, 3942 (2021).
 67. van Dijk, D. et al. Recovering gene interactions from single-cell data using 
data diffusion. Cell 174, 716–729.e27 (2018).
 68. Blondel, V . D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R. & Lefebvre, E. Fast unfolding 
of communities in large networks. J. Stat. Mech. 2008, P10008 (2008).
 69. Sekiya, S. & Suzuki, A. Direct conversion of mouse fibroblasts to 
hepatocyte-like cells by defined factors. Nature 475, 390–393 (2011).
 70. Stoffers, D. A., Zinkin, N. T., Stanojevic, V ., Clarke, W . L. & Habener, J. F . 
Pancreatic agenesis attributable to a single nucleotide deletion in the human 
IPF1 gene coding sequence. Nat. Genet. 15, 106–110 (1997).
 71. Jonsson, J., Carlsson, L., Edlund, T. & Edlund, H. Insulin-promoter-factor 1 
is required for pancreas development in mice. Nature 371, 606–609 (1994).
 72. Jaitin, D. A. et al. Massively parallel single-cell RNA-seq for marker-free 
decomposition of tissues into cell types. Science 343, 776–779 (2014).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adap-
tation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to 
the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other 
third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statu-
tory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
NATuRe MeTHoDS | VOL 19 | FeBRUARY 2022 | 159–170 | www.nature.com/ naturemethods170


[PDF_PAGE 13]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Methods
The CellRank algorithm. The aim of the CellRank algorithm is to detect the 
initial, intermediate and terminal states of a system, and to define a global fate map 
that assigns, for each cell, the probability of reaching each terminal state. CellRank 
can compute gene expression trends along trajectories in the inferred fate map and 
visualize these in several ways.
Inputs to CellRank are a cell (N) by gene (G) count matrix X∈R
N×G, and velocity 
matrix V∈RN×G that defines a vector field representing RNA velocities14,15. Note 
that CellRank can use any vector field; for example, V could represent directed 
information given by metabolic labeling4–6,73. CellRank comprises three main steps:
 (1) Compute transition probabilities—the likelihood that a cell will transition 
from one state, defined by its gene expression profile, to another—by 
integrating two sources of evidence: transcriptomic similarity between the 
source and target cells and an extrapolation of a cell’s current expression 
profile into the near future using RNA velocity. We aggregate these 
probabilities in the transition matrix P and use it to model cell state transi-
tions as a Markov chain.
 (2) Coarse-grain the Markov chain into a set of initial, terminal and intermediate 
macrostates, and assign each cell to each macrostate via membership matrix 
χ. The assignment is soft, meaning that each macrostate is assigned with a 
certain confidence. We compute transition probabilities among macrostates 
in the matrix P
c, allowing us to classify macrostates as initial, terminal or 
intermediate.
 (3) Compute fate probabilities towards a subset of the macrostates (typically 
terminal states, but possibly also intermediate states, depending on the bio-
logical question). We compute how likely each cell is to transition into each of 
the selected macrostates and return these probabilities in a fate matrix F.
CellRank extracts the essence of cellular state transitions. CellRank decomposes 
a biological system into a set of dynamical macrostates, associated with regions 
in the phenotypic manifold, which cells are unlikely to leave once they have 
entered. We compute how likely each cell is to belong to each macrostate and 
accumulate these soft assignments in a membership matrix 
χ ∈ RN×ns where ns 
is the number of macrostates. Further, we compute a coarse-grained transition 
matrix 
Pc ∈ Rns ×ns, which specifies transition probabilities among macrostates and 
reduces the biological system to its essence: dynamical macrostates of observed 
cell state transitions and their relationship to one another. We classify macrostates 
as initial, bearing very small incoming, but large outgoing, transition probability; 
terminal, with large incoming, very little outgoing and large self-transition 
probability; and intermediate, with both incoming and outgoing probabilities.
CellRank computes probabilistic fate potentials. Next, CellRank efficiently 
computes the probabilities that each cell will transition to each of the n
t terminal 
states, and returns a fate matrix F ∈ RN×nt. Matrix F extends the short-range fate 
relationships given by RNA velocity to the global scale: from initial to terminal 
states along the phenotypic manifold. We account for high noise levels in the 
velocity vectors via a stochastic Markov chain formulation, by restricting predicted 
transitions to align with the phenotypic manifold and by propagating velocity 
uncertainty into the Markov chain.
CellRank uncovers gene expression trends towards specific terminal 
populations. The outputs of the CellRank algorithm are:
• Membership matrix 
χ ∈ RN×ns. Row i in χ softly assigns cell i to the set of ns 
macrostates.
• Coarse-grained transition matrix Pc ∈ Rns ×ns.
• Fate matrix F ∈ RN×nt. Row i in F specifies how likely cell i is to transition 
towards any terminal state.
We use the fate matrix F to model gradual lineage commitment, which 
can be visualized jointly for all terminal states in CellRank by using circular 
projections. Fate biases can be aggregated to the cluster level and visualized as pie 
charts on a new directed version of PAGA graphs
8. Further, we use F to fit gene 
expression trends towards the identified terminal states. Trends can be clustered to 
discover the main regulatory dynamics towards different terminal states. For the 
identification of putative regulators towards specific terminal states, we correlate 
gene expression values with fate probabilities.
Modeling approach. CellRank models cell state transitions but, unlike other 
velocity-based methods, it follows the success of pseudotime methods by 
restricting state changes to those consistent with the global structure of 
the phenotypic manifold (that is, a KNN graph based on gene expression 
similarity). Our approach biases the likely future state of an observed cell by 
combining transcriptional similarity with RNA velocity to direct edges in the 
graph, and assigns a probability to each cell state transition. When computing 
these probabilities, we take into account uncertainty in the velocity vectors. 
By aggregating individual, stochastic transitions in the global structure of the 
phenotypic manifold, we uncover the fate bias for individual cells. CellRank 
assumes that:
• State transitions are gradual; each state in the progression is, in general, tran-
scriptomically similar to the previous state. Cells traverse a low-dimensional 
phenotypic manifold from initial to terminal states via a set of intermediate 
states.
• The set of sampled cellular profiles spans the entire state-change trajectory; 
that is, intermediate states have been covered and the trajectory has no ‘gaps’ .
• While a cell’s history may be stored epigenetically, we model average cellular 
dynamics where state transitions occur without memory.
• RNA velocity approximates the first derivative of gene expression. This need 
not hold precisely for every gene in each cell as we treat state transitions as a 
stochastic process, enforce alignment with the manifold and propagate uncer-
tainty, but it should hold for enough cells to enable estimation of the overall 
directional flow. In particular, this should hold for the main driver genes of 
the biological process. We urge users to assess this for their particular system 
by using scVelo’s dynamical model of splicing kinetics to check whether the 
top likelihood genes contain biological drivers, and whether their fits have 
converged. For example, insufficiently resolved splicing kinetics prevent the 
model from correctly resolving a small state of pancreatic terminal Delta cells 
(Extended Data Fig. 7).
Based on these assumptions, we model cellular state transitions using a Markov 
chain: a stochastic process X = (X
t)t∈T that models the evolution of the distribution 
of a random variable Xt over a state space Ω where the future distribution 
depends only on the current distribution and not on the past distribution, that is, 
Pr (Xtn+1 = x|Xt1 = x1,X t2 = x2,… ,X tn = xn)= Pr (Xtn+1 = x|Xtn = xn). The 
Markov chain traverses a discrete and finite state space Ω, where each state in the 
chain is given by an observed cellular transcriptional profile. To define the Markov 
chain, we need to compute a transition matrix P∈R
N×N, which describes how likely 
one cell is to transition into another. We construct P using a KNN graph based on 
transcriptional similarity between cells and a given vector field. While CellRank 
generalizes to any given vector field, we demonstrate it using RNA velocities, based 
on unspliced-to-spliced read ratios, computed with scVelo
15.
Defining initial, intermediate and terminal states in biological terms. We define 
an initial (terminal) state as an ensemble of measured gene expression profiles 
which, when taken together, characterize the start (end) point of one particular 
sampled biological process. We define an intermediate state as an ensemble of gene 
expression profiles that characterize a point between initial and terminal states on 
the cell state transition trajectory.
Translating initial, intermediate and terminal states into mathematical terms. 
The macrostates defined above can be derived mathematically although the 
membership matrix χ and the coarse-grained transition matrix P
c. Our assignment 
of cells to macrostates maximizes ‘crispness’74—limited overlap between macrostates 
and large self-transition probabilities—as we show below. This procedure recovers 
the kinetics of the Markov chain over long timescales, that is, macrostates and their 
transitions reflect the limiting behavior of the Markov chain. We identify initial 
states as those macrostates with little incoming, but large outgoing, transition 
probability in P
c. Intermediate states have both incoming and outgoing transition 
probability, and terminal states have large incoming, but little outgoing, and large 
self-transition probability. Macrostates are metastable—they define regions of 
phenotypic space that cells are unlikely to leave once they have entered. Terminal 
states are typically highly metastable, whereas intermediate states are typically 
only weakly metastable. Initial states can constitute weakly metastable states, if the 
probability of leaving is small, potentially because of heavily cycling populations.
Reversing the Markov chain to recover initial states. If cells begin traversing 
their trajectory rapidly, initial states may not be stable enough to be identified as 
macrostates by coarse-graining the Markov chain. In these cases, we reverse the 
Markov chain, that is, we flip the arrows in the velocity vector field V. The initial 
state now constitutes a terminal (that is, metastable) state of the reversed dynamics 
and may be recovered by coarse-graining and interpreting the reversed Markov 
chain.
Defining fate probabilities towards macrostates. Biologically, we define the 
probability that cell i will reach macrostate (fate) j∈{1,...,n
s} as the probability that 
cell i executes a series of gene expression program changes to match the phenotype 
of cells in macrostate j. In the context of fate probabilities, we are typically 
interested in terminal or intermediate macrostates. Mathematically, we translate 
this to the probability of a random walk on the Markov chain initialized in cell i 
to reach any cell belonging to macrostate j before reaching any cell belonging to 
another macrostate. CellRank efficiently computes these probabilities in closed 
form using absorption probabilities.
Computing the transition matrix. We model each observed cell by one microstate 
in the Markov chain. To compute transition probabilities among cells, we make 
use of transcriptomic similarity to define the global topology of the phenotypic 
manifold and of RNA velocity to direct local movement on the manifold. To model 
the global topology of the phenotypic manifold, the first step of the CellRank 
algorithm is to compute a KNN graph.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 14]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Computing a KNN graph to align local transitions with global topology. 
We compute a KNN graph to constrain the set of possible transitions to those 
consistent with the global topology of the phenotypic manifold; each cell can only 
transition into a nearest neighbor. While CellRank can generalize to any similarity 
kernel, we compute the KNN graph here as follows:
• Project the data onto the first L PCs to obtain a matrix X
PC∈RN×L, where rows 
correspond to cells and columns correspond to PC features.
• For each cell i, compute Euclidean distances to its K nearest neighbors in XPC. 
Accumulate distances in a matrix D∈RN×N.
• The KNN relationship will lead to a directed graph because it is not a sym-
metric relationship. Symmetrize the KNN relations encoded by D, such that 
cells i and j are nearest neighbors if either i is a nearest neighbors of j, or j is a 
nearest neighbors of i. This will yield an undirected symmetric version D
sym of 
D, where each cell has at least K nearest neighbors.
• Compute a symmetric adjacency matrix A based on Dsym containing similarity 
estimates between neighboring cells according to the manifold structure. To 
approximate cell similarities, we use the method implemented in the UMAP 
algorithm, which adapts the singular set and geometric realization functors 
from algebraic topology to work in the context of metric spaces and fuzzy 
simplicial sets
28,75.
We choose K = 30 nearest neighbors by default, but CellRank is robust to 
the choice of K (Supplementary Fig. 6b). The default similarity metric is that of 
SCANPY
76, although similarity may be computed using a Gaussian kernel with 
density-scaled kernel width as introduced by Coifman et al.77 and adapted to 
single-cell context by Haghverdi et al.7. The number of PCs is L = 30 by default, 
but can be adjusted based on knee-point heuristics or the percentage of variance 
explained. CellRank is robust to the exact choice of L (Supplementary Fig. 6e).
Directing the KNN graph based on RNA velocity. Next, we direct the edges of 
the KNN graph using RNA velocity information, giving higher probability to those 
neighbors whose direction best aligns with the direction of the velocity vector. 
Specifically, for cell i with gene expression profile x
i∈RG and velocity vector vi∈RG, 
consider its neighbors j∈{1,2,...,Ki} with gene expression profiles {x1,x2,...,xKi}. Note 
that the graph construction outlined above leads to a symmetric KNN graph, 
where K
i is not constant across all cells, but Ki≥K∀i∈{1,...,N}. For each neighboring 
cell k, compute the corresponding state-change vector with cell i, sik = xk−xi∈RG. 
Next, we compute Pearson correlations ci ∈ RKi of vi with all state-change vectors 
{sik}. Intuitively, ci contains the cosines of the angles that the mean-centered vi 
forms with the mean-centered state-change vectors {sik}. A value of one means 
perfect correlation between the gene expression changes predicted by the local 
velocity vector and the actual change observed when going from the reference 
cell to any of its nearest neighbors. Pearson correlations have been computed 
in similar ways by scVelo
15 and velocyto14 to project the velocity vectors into a 
given embedding. In the following, we show how these ideas can be formalized 
and extended to account for uncertainty in the velocity vector. CellRank’s 
final transition matrix differs fundamentally from velocyto’s, with important 
implications for identifying rare populations and local dynamics.
Transforming correlations into transition probabilities. To use the vector c
i as 
a set of transition probabilities to neighboring cells, we need to make sure it is 
positive and sums to one. For cell i, define a set of transition probabilities 
pi ∈ RKi via
pik = eσcik
∑
l eσcil
,
where σ > 0 is a scalar constant that controls how centered the categorical 
distribution will be around the most likely value, that is around the state-change 
transition with maximum correlation (below). We repeat this for all (i, k) which are 
nearest neighbors to compute the transition matrix P
v∈RN×N. This scales linearly in 
the number of cells (N), nearest neighbors (K) and genes (G), as the KNN graph is 
sparse.
Automatically determine σ. Reasoning that σ should depend on typical Pearson 
correlation between velocity vectors and state-change vectors observed in the 
dataset, we use the heuristic:
σ = 1
median({|cik|∀(i, k)}).
Thus, if the median absolute Pearson correlation observed in the data is large 
(small), we use a small (large) value for σ. The intuition behind this is to slightly 
upscale all correlations for sparsely sampled datasets, where velocity vectors point 
only roughly in the direction of neighboring cells. Values for σ computed this way 
range from 1.5 for the lung example
52 to 3.8 for the pancreas example24.
Coping with uncertainty in the velocity vectors. scRNA-seq data is a noisy 
measurement of the gene expression state of individual cells. RNA velocity is 
derived from these measurements and is itself therefore very noisy. In particular, 
the unspliced reads required to estimate velocities are very sparse, and their 
abundance varies by the amount of relevant intronic sequence per gene. Besides 
this inherent noise, preprocessing decisions in the alignment of spliced and 
unspliced reads impact the final velocity estimate
78. Further uncertainty in the 
velocity estimate arises because modeling assumptions may not always be satisfied:
• The velocyto14 model assumes that the data captures the steady state of each 
gene. The scVelo15 model circumvents this assumption by dynamic modeling, 
extending RNA velocity to transient cell populations; however, only a few 
transitional cells are available to estimate these dynamics.
• Both models assume that the key driver genes for a given transition are 
intron-rich and may therefore be used to estimate splicing ratios. This assump-
tion has been shown to hold in many neurological settings, but remains 
unclear in systems such as hematopoiesis. In our pancreas analysis, Cd24a 
is an example of a gene that is expressed in most cells (62%), but only has 
unspliced counts in three cells (Extended Data Fig. 7b). This gene is important 
for delta cell development, yet it has too few unspliced counts to robustly 
compute RNA velocity.
• Both models assume that a single set of per-gene kinetic parameters α (tran-
scription rate), β (splicing rate) and γ (degradation rate) may be used across 
all cells, but this assumption is often violated because of alternative splicing or 
cell-type-specific regulation
79–82.
• Both models assume no batch effects in the data. To the best of our knowledge, 
there are currently no tools to correct for batch effects in velocity estimates.
• Both models assume that cell state transitions captured in the data are compat-
ible with the time scale of splicing kinetics. However, this is often not known 
a priori and may explain the limited success of RNA velocity in studying 
hematopoiesis so far.
To cope with the substantial uncertainty present in RNA velocity, we adapt four 
strategies:
• We restrict the set of possible transitions to those consistent with the global 
topology of the phenotypic manifold as described by the KNN graph.
• We use a stochastic formulation based on Markov chains to describe cell state 
transitions. For cell i with velocity vector v
i, we allow transitions to each near-
est neighbor j with transition probability pij. This means that we even allow 
backward transitions, against the flow prescribed by the velocity vector field, 
with small probability. This reflects our uncertainty in v
i.
• We combine RNA velocity information with transcriptomic similarity.
• We propagate uncertainty in vi into the downstream computations.
Emphasizing transcriptomic similarity. Thus far, we have combined RNA velocity 
with transcriptomic similarity by computing a similarity-based KNN graph to 
restrict the set of possible transitions. To further take advantage of the information 
captured by the KNN graph and to increase robustness of the algorithm to noisy 
velocity vectors, we combine the velocity-based transition matrix P
v with a 
similarity-based transition matrix Ps via
P =( 1 − λ)Pv + λPs for λ ∈ [0, 1].
The matrix Ps is computed by row-normalizing the adjacency matrix A, which 
we introduced above in the context of the KNN graph. The parameter λ defines 
how much weight is given to the connectivity-based (that is, transcriptomic 
similarity-based) transition probabilities. In practical applications, we have found 
that using values around λ = 0.2 increase robustness with respect to noisy velocity 
estimates. The matrix P is the final transition matrix estimated by the CellRank 
algorithm.
Coarse-graining the Markov chain. Each cell in the transition matrix P constitutes 
a microstate of the Markov chain, but it is difficult to interpret the cellular 
trajectory directly from P because it is a fine-grained, noisy representation of cell 
state transitions. We seek to reduce P to its essence: macrostates, representing 
key biological states, and the probabilities of transitioning between them. We 
accomplish this using pyGPCCA, which uses the GPCCA
19,20,83—a method 
developed to study conformational dynamics in proteins. We adapt it to the 
single-cell setting and use it to project P onto a much smaller coarse-grained 
transition matrix P
c that describes transitions among macrostates. A macrostate is 
associated with a subset M of the state space M⊂Ω. The macrostates are defined 
through a so-called membership matrix χ. Rows of χ contain the soft assignment of 
each cell to the set of macrostates.
Generalized Perron Cluster Cluster Analysis. For the projected or embedded 
dynamics to be Markovian, we require the projection of P onto P
c to be based on an 
invariant subspace of P, that is, a subspace W for which
P⊤ x ∈ W ∀x ∈ W.
In the case of reversible P, invariant subspaces are spanned by the eigenvectors 
of P74. In our case, however, P is nonreversible and the eigenvectors will, in general, 
be complex. Since the GPCCA method cannot cope with complex vectors, we 
rely on real invariant subspaces of the matrix P for the projection. Such subspaces 
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 15]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
are spanned by the real Schur vectors of P19,20,84 that are provided by a real Schur 
decomposition
P = QRQ⊤ .
The columns of the matrix Q∈RN×N are the Schur vectors and the Schur form 
R∈RN×N is quasi-upper triangular85. R has 1 × 1 or 2 × 2 blocks on the diagonal, 
where the former are given by the real eigenvalues and the latter are associated with 
pairs of complex conjugate eigenvalues.
Invariant subspaces of the transition matrix. Columns of Q corresponding to real 
eigenvalues span real invariant subspaces. Columns of Q corresponding to pairs of 
complex conjugate eigenvalues span real invariant subspaces when kept together, 
but not if they are separated. Particularly, for columns q
j and qk of Q belonging to 
a pair of complex conjugate eigenvalues, the space W0 = span(qj, qk) is invariant 
under P, but the individual qj and qk are not86. Depending on the constructed 
subspace, different dynamical properties of P will be projected onto Pc. Choosing 
Schur vectors belonging to real eigenvalues close to 1, metastabilities are recovered, 
while for Schur vectors with complex eigenvalues close to the unit circle, cyclic 
dynamics are recovered
19,20. Both options are available in CellRank, defaulting to 
the recovery of metastabilities.
Projecting the transition matrix. Let ˜Q ∈ RN×ns be the matrix formed by 
selecting ns columns from Q according to some criterion (metastability or 
cyclicity). Let χ ∈ RN×ns be a matrix obtained via linear combinations of the 
columns in ˜Q, that is
χ = ˜QA, (1)
for an invertible rotation matrix A ∈ Rns ×ns. Rows of χ define membership to 
macrostates; we describe χ and A in more detail below. We obtain the projected 
transition matrix via an invariant subspace projection19,20,
Pc =
(
χ⊤ Dχ
)−1 (
χ⊤ DPχ
)
,
where D is the diagonal matrix of a weighted scalar product. The Schur vectors 
in ˜Q must be orthogonal with respect to this weighted scalar product, that is 
˜Q⊤ D˜Q = I with the ns-dimensional unit matrix I, to yield the required invariant 
subspace projection. The diagonal elements of D are in principle arbitrary, but 
a convenient choice would be the uniform distribution or some distribution 
of the cellular states of interest, for example, the stationary distribution, if it 
exists. Choosing the uniform distribution, as is the default in CellRank, would 
result in an indiscriminate handling (without imposing any presumptions about 
their distribution) of the cellular states. Note that the matrix inversion above is 
performed on a very small matrix of size n
s×ns.
Properties of the invariant subspace projection. Coarse-grained transition 
probabilities among macrostates are defined via an invariant subspace projection of 
P onto the set of macrostates. More precisely, P is projected onto a low-dimensional 
invariant subspace defined by the membership vectors χ, which are linear 
transformations of the Schur vectors. By applying an invariant subspace projection, 
the projection error vanishes and the coarse-graining operation commutes with 
the propagation operation
20,87. In other words, given an initial density over cell 
states, the following yield the same result: (1) propagating the cell density using 
the original matrix P and then projecting the propagated density onto the set of 
macrostates, or (2) projecting the initial cell density onto the set of macrostates 
and propagating it using P
c. It follows that the projected, coarse-grained Markov 
chain preserves the slow timescales of the process, that is the transitions between 
metastable subsets of the phenotypic manifold
20.
Computing membership vectors. In principle, we could use any invertible 
rotation matrix A above. However, we would like to interpret the columns of χ as 
membership vectors that define assignment weights for all cells. For this reason, 
we seek a matrix that minimizes the overlap between membership vectors in χ, 
that is, a rotation matrix A that minimizes off-diagonal entries in 
χ⊤ Dχ. This is 
equivalent to maximizing
trace(S)= trace
(
˜D−1 χ⊤ Dχ
)
.
The matrix ˜D−1 chosen to row-normalized can be expressed as
˜D−1 = diag
(
1∑
j(χTDχ)1j
, ..., 1∑
j(χTDχ)ns j
)
Choosing Schur vectors with real eigenvalues close to one, thus recovering 
metastability, maximizing trace(S) can be interpreted as maximizing the 
metastability of the macrostates in the system. In practice, we minimize
fns (A)= ns − trace (S), (2)
as our objective function where S is a function of A (above). This objective function 
is bounded below by zero and convex on the feasible set defined through linear 
constraints
74. We must minimize fns with respect to the constraints
χij ≥ 0 ∀i ∈{ 1, ..., N}∀ j ∈{ 1, ..., ns} (positivity),
∑
j
χij = 1 ∀i ∈{ 1, ..., N} (partition of unity).
We can re-express these conditions, using equation (1) and a result from 
Weber88 such that they can be written in terms of the invertible rotation matrix A 
and the matrix of selected Schur vectors ˜Q,
A(1, j)= − min
l=1,...,N
ns∑
i=2
˜Q(l, i)A(i, j) ∀j ∈{ 1, ..., nc} (positivity),
A(i, 1)= δi,1 −
ns∑
j=2
A(i, j) ∀i ∈{ 1, ..., nc} (partition of unity).
Optimizing equation (2) subject to these constraints is no trivial task. Among 
the several possibilities to solve the optimization problem, a convenient choice is 
to perform unconstrained optimization on 
A2:ns ,2:ns using a trick: to impose the 
constraints after each iteration step, thus transforming the unfeasible solution into 
a feasible solution74. However, this approach is nondifferentiable. Therefore, in 
CellRank, we use the derivative-free Nelder-Mead method as implemented in the 
Scipy routine scipy.optimize.fmin89 for the optimization.
Positivity of the projected transition matrix. Note that Pc may have negative 
elements if macrostates share a large overlap. In practice, this is caused by a 
suboptimal number of macrostates n
s and can be resolved by changing that 
number. We may interpret Pc as the transition matrix of a Markov chain between 
the set of macrostates if it is non-negative within numerical precision20.
Tuning the number of macrostates. The number of macrostates ns can be chosen 
in a number of ways, all available through CellRank:
• Using the eigengap heuristic for the real part of the eigenvalues close to one.
• Define the crispness ξ of the solution as the value of trace(˜D−1 χ⊤ Dχ)/ns, see 
Röblitz and Weber74. The larger this value, the smaller the overlap between the 
macrostates, and, in turn, the sharper or ‘crisper’ the recovered macrostates. 
Crispness can be computed for different numbers of macrostates ns and the 
number ns with the largest value of ξ should be selected.
• To avoid having to solve the full problem for too many values of ns, do a prese-
lection using the minChi criterion74: based on an initial guess for A, compute a 
membership matrix χ and calculate minChi = mini,j(χij). In general, this value 
will be negative because the starting guess is infeasible. The closer to zero the 
value of minChi, the more we can expect n
s to yield a crisp decomposition of 
the dynamics.
• Combining the minChi criterion and the crispness to avoid solving the full 
problem for many n
s, but still select the ns with the crispest decomposition. 
This is done by first selecting an interval of potentially good numbers of mac-
rostates n
s via the minChi criterion and afterwards using the crispness to select 
the best ns from the preselected macrostate numbers.
Scalable Python implementation of GPCCA. Following the original MATLAB 
implementation
90, we wrote up GPCCA as a general algorithm in Python and 
created a package for it: pyGPCCA91. pyGPCCA comes with a comprehensive 
documentation and testing suite to make sure it is easily maintainable and 
extendable. While pyGPCCA serves as the backbone for CellRank, we anticipate 
it to be used outside the single-cell community as well, for example in the study 
of protein conformational dynamics. A naive implementation of the Schur 
decomposition would scale cubical in cell number. We alleviate this problem by 
using SLEPc to compute a sorted partial real Schur decomposition using an iterative, 
Krylov-subspace-based algorithm that optimally exploits the sparsity structure of 
the transition matrix
92,93. Overall, this reduces the computational complexity of our 
algorithm to be roughly linear in cell number (Fig. 5d and Supplementary Table 1). 
This allows CellRank to scale well to very large cell numbers.
Determine terminal states. To automatically identify terminal states, we look for 
the most stable macrostates in the coarse-grained transition matrix P
c. Define the 
SI of a macrostate m∈{1,...,ns} through its corresponding diagonal value in Pc, that 
is, through its self-transition probability Pcmm. The intuition behind this is that cells 
in terminal populations should have very little probability to transition to cells in 
other populations and should distribute most (if not all) of their probability mass 
to cells from the same terminal population. To identify the number of terminal 
states, we set a threshold on SI; that is, we classify all states as terminal for which 
SI ≥ ϵSI with ϵSI = 0.96 by default.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 16]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Determine initial states. To automatically identify initial states, we introduce the 
CGSD πp ∈ Rns given by
πp = χ⊤ π
where π ∈ RN
+ is the stationary distribution of the original transition matrix P. The 
stationary distribution satisfies
π⊤ P = π⊤ and
∑
i
πi = 1.
In other words, the stationary distribution π is an invariant measure of P and 
can be computed by normalizing the top left eigenvector of P (corresponding to 
eigenvalue 1). Under certain conditions (ergodicity
94) imposed on the Markov 
chain, the stationary distribution is the distribution that the process converges to 
if it evolves for long enough, that is, it describes the long-term evolution of the 
Markov chain. In the same vein, the CGSD πc describes the long-term evolution 
of the Markov chain given by Pc. The CGSD πc assigns large (small) values to 
macrostates that the process spends a large (little) amount of time in, if it is run 
infinitely long. As such, we may identify initial states by looking for macrostates 
that are assigned the smallest values in π
c. The intuition behind this is that initial 
states should be states that the process is unlikely to visit again once it has left 
them. The number of initial states is a parameter with a default of one, which can 
be set to detect several initial states.
Determine intermediate state. Remaining macrostates, which have been classified 
as neither terminal nor initial, are classified as intermediate. Intermediate states 
in developmental processes usually have a consistent signal of moving onto more 
mature states, even if there is some pausing, and are therefore placed correctly 
on the phenotypic manifold by the KNN graph. If this movement signal is in P, 
it will also be present in P
c. As long as RNA velocity vectors roughly capture the 
direction of differentiation for intermediate states, CellRank will correctly tell apart 
intermediate from terminal states by restricting the velocity vectors to be consistent 
with the local manifold structure.
Handling reducible Markov chains. A Markov chain is irreducible if it is 
possible to get from any state to any other state in a finite number of transitions 
(it is reducible if not). Our transition matrix construction ensures that, as long 
as the underlying KNN graph is connected, the resulting Markov chain will 
be irreducible. That is because we allow for transitions against the direction of 
the local RNA velocity vector, with small probability. If the KNN graph is not 
connected, then the resulting Markov chain will be reducible; for example, there 
is an outlier cell type that does not participate in the main dynamics of the data. 
Reducible Markov chains pose no problem to GPCCA. In the example, the outlier 
cell type will be assigned its own macrostate with no transition probability to other 
macrostates in P
c. Likewise, there will be no incoming transition probability to 
the outlier macrostate, thus making it easy for the user to identify this in Pc as a 
macrostate that does not participate in the overall dynamics. To compute the initial 
states among the remaining macrostates, it is best to exclude the outlier macrostate. 
Upon exclusion, the remaining coarse-grained Markov chain will be irreducible 
again, hence a unique stationary distribution exists that can be used to identify the 
initial states, as described above.
Computing fate probabilities. Given the soft assignment of cells to macrostates by 
χ and the identification of terminal states through P
c, we compute how likely each 
cell is to transition towards these terminal states. Let nt be the number of terminal 
states. For the sake of clarity, we only describe fate probabilities towards terminal 
states; however, the computations below apply just as well to intermediate states, 
if that is the biological question. For each terminal macrostate t for t∈{1,...,n
t}, we 
choose f cells that are strongly assigned to t according to χ. That is, for terminal 
macrostate t, we extract the corresponding column from χ and we calculate the 
terminal index set R
t of cells that have the largest values in this column of χ. If cell 
i is part of the terminal index set Rt, we assume cell i is among the f most eligible 
cells to characterize the terminal macrostate t in terms of gene expression. We 
store the indices of the remaining cells in the transient index set T. The index 
sets {Rt|t∈{1,...,nt}} and T form a disjoint partition of the state space, which 
means they do not overlap and they cover the entire state space. For each cell i 
in T, we would like to compute a vector of probabilities 
fi ∈ Rnt which specifies 
how likely this cell is to transition into any of the terminal states characterized 
through {Rt}. To interpret fi as a categorical distribution over cell fate, we require 
fi,t≥0∀i∈T∀t∈{1,...,nt} and ∑
t
fit = 1∀i ∈ T. We accumulate the fi column-wise in 
the fate matrix F ∈ RN×nt.
Absorption probabilities disclose cell fates. We could approximate the fi based 
on sampling: initialize a random walk on the Markov chain in cell i; walk until 
any cell from a terminal set Rt is reached; record t and repeat this many times; 
and finally, count how often random walks initialized in cell i terminated in any 
of the terminal index sets R
t. In the limit of repeating this infinitely many times, 
the normalized frequencies over reaching either terminal set will be equal to the 
desired fate probabilities for cell i, under reasonable assumptions on the Markov 
chain (irreducibility). Luckily, this does not require a sampling-based approach, as 
we can leverage a closed-form solution: absorption probabilities.
Computing absorption probabilities. Key to the concept of absorption 
probabilities are recurrent and transient classes, which we will define here for the 
present case of a finite and discrete state space. Let i∈Ω and j∈Ω be two states of 
the Markov chain. In our case, i and j are cells. We say that i is accessible from j, if 
and only if, there exists a path from j to i according to the transition matrix P. A 
path is a sequence of transitions which has nonzero transition probability. Further, 
i and j communicate if, and only if, i is accessible from j and j is also accessible 
from i. Communication defines an equivalence relation on the state space Ω, that 
is, it is a reflexive, symmetric and transitive relation between two states
94. It follows 
that the state space Ω can be partitioned into its communication classes {C1,...,Ck}. 
The communication classes are mutually disjoint nonempty and their union is 
Ω. In other words: any two states from the same class communicate, states from 
different classes never communicate. We call a communication class C
j closed if the 
submatrix of P restricted to Cj has all rows sum to one. Intuitively, if Cj is closed, 
then a random walk which enters Cj never leaves it again. Closed communication 
classes are also called recurrent classes. If a communication class is not recurrent, 
we call it transient. In Theorem 1, we reproduce the statement of Thm. 28 in 
Tolver
94 to compute absorption probabilities towards states that belong to recurrent 
classes on the Markov chain.
Theorem 1—absorption probabilities. Consider a MC with transition matrix 
P∈R
N×N. We may rewrite P as
[ ˜P 0
SQ
]
,
where ˜P and Q are restrictions of P to recurrent and transient states, respectively, 
and S is the restriction of P to transitions from transient to recurrent states. The 
upper right 0 is due to the fact that there are no transitions back from recurrent to 
transient states. Define the matrix M = (I − Q)
−1.Then, the ijth entry of M describes 
the expected number of visits of the process to state j before absorption, conditional 
on the process being initialized in state i. M is often referred to as the fundamental 
matrix of the MC. Further, the matrix A = (I − Q)
−1S contains, in the ijth entry, the 
probability of j being the first recurrent state reached by the MC, given that it was 
started in i.
For a proof, see Thm. 28 in Tolver
94. To compute fate probabilities towards the 
terminal index sets Rt defined above, we approximate these as recurrent classes; 
that is, we remove any outgoing edges from these sets. We then apply Theorem 
1, which, for each cell i∈T yields absorption probabilities towards each of the f 
cells in each of the n
t recurrent index sets. We aggregate these to yield absorption 
probabilities towards Rt by summing absorption probabilities towards individual 
cells in these sets.
CellRank provides an efficient implementation to compute absorption 
probabilities. A naive implementation of absorption probabilities scales cubically 
in the number of transient cells due to the matrix inversion A = (I − Q)
−1S. The 
number of transient cells is smaller than the total cell number only by a small 
constant, so the naive approach can be considered cubic in total cell number. This 
will inevitably fail for large cell numbers. We alleviate this by rewriting the above as 
a linear problem,
(I − Q)A = S. (3)
Note that Q is very sparse as it describes transitions between nearest neighbors. 
Per row, Q has approximately K entries. To exploit the sparsity, iterative solvers are 
very appealing as their per iteration cost applied to this problem is linear in cell 
number and in the number of nearest neighbors. To apply an iterative solver, we 
must, however, rewrite equation (3) such that the right-hand side is vector valued,
(I − Q)a1 = s1, ..., (I − Q)afnt = sfnt ,
where fnt is the total number of cells which belong to approximately recurrent 
classes. To solve these individual problems, we use the iterative GMRES95 algorithm 
which efficiently exploits sparsity. For optimal performance, we use the PETSc 
implementation, which makes use of efficient message passing and other practical 
performance enhancements. Finally, we parallelize solving the fnt linear problems. 
Taken together, these tricks allow us to compute absorption probabilities quickly 
even for large cell numbers (Fig. 5d and Supplementary Table 1).
Visualizing fate probabilities through circular embeddings. In this presentation, 
we follow work by Velten et al.
50, which in turn is based on circular a posteriori 
projections72. Let F ∈ RN×nt by the matrix of fate probabilities for N cells and nt 
terminal states such that Fi,: contains the fate probabilities for cell i. We seek a 2D 
arrangement of cells that reflects their fate probabilities. Therefore, we evenly space 
terminal states around the unit circle and assign each state an angle αt. We then 
transform each cell’s vector of fate probabilities Fi,: into a 2D representation 
(xi, yi) using
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 17]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
xi =
∑
t
fit cos αt,
yi =
∑
t
fit sin αt.
As the representation depends on the order in which terminal states are 
arranged around the unit circle, we compute pairwise similarities among fate 
probabilities F:,t corresponding to each terminal state t, and we choose the 
arrangement that maximizes pairwise similarities. By default, we use cosine 
correlation to quantify similarity.
Quantifying multilineage potential through fate probabilities. CellRank 
provides two ways of quantifying multilineage potential on the basis of computed 
fate probabilities:
• through S
i, the entropy over fate probabilities Fi,: (called ‘diffusion potential’ in 
Palantir21)
• through KL(Fi,: ||F: ), the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between fate prob-
abilities Fi,: and the average fate probability per lineage across cells F: (called 
‘priming degree’ in STEMNET50)
Intuitively, Si quantifies how far from uniform the distribution Fi,: is and 
KL(Fi,: ||¯F: ) quantifies how far from the average fate distribution Fi,: is. The higher 
Si and the lower KL(Fi,: ||¯F: ), the more uncommitted a cell is. In situations where 
the initial cells are already expected to have a dominant direction of fate bias, we 
suggest using the KL divergence, as it will increase monotonically as cells move 
to terminal states while the entropy will reach its maximum at the point between 
initial and terminal states that come closest to uniform.
Propagating velocity uncertainty. So far, we have assumed that individual velocity 
vectors are deterministic, that is, they have no measurement error. However, RNA 
velocity is estimated on the basis of spliced and unspliced gene counts, which are 
noisy quantities. Hence, the velocity vectors v
i themselves should be treated as 
random variables that follow a certain distribution. Our aim is to propagate the 
distribution over vi into our final quantities of interest—state assignments and 
fate probabilities—but no closed-form equation relates these final quantities to 
v
i. A possible solution is to use an MC scheme where we draw velocity vectors, 
compute final quantities based on the draw and repeat this many times. In the 
limit of infinite draws, this will give us the distribution over final quantities, given 
the distribution in v
i. However, we need to repeat our computation many times, 
which will become prohibitively expensive for large datasets. To get around this 
problem, we construct an analytical approximation to the MC-based scheme. This 
approximation will have to be evaluated only once and we can omit the sampling. 
We show, in a practical example, that the analytical approximation gives very 
similar results to the sampling-based scheme and improves over a deterministic 
approach by a large margin.
Modeling the distribution over velocity vectors. Before we can propagate 
uncertainty, we need to model the uncertainty in the velocity vectors estimated by 
scVelo
15 or velocyto14. Ideally, these packages would model uncertainty in the raw 
spliced and unspliced counts and propagate this into a distribution over velocity 
vectors. However, as that is currently not the case, we will make an assumption 
about their distribution and use the KNN graph to fine-tune expectation and 
variance by considering neighboring velocity vectors. To ease notation and 
illustrate core ideas, we will drop the subscript i in this section and focus on one 
fixed cell and its velocity vector v. Let’s assume that v follows a multivariate normal 
(MVN) distribution,
v ∼ N(μ, Σv),
with mean vector μ∈RG and covariance matrix Σv∈RG×G. The MVN is a reasonable 
choice here as velocities can be both positive and negative and, for most genes, 
as we expect to see both up- and downregulation, velocity values will be 
approximately symmetrical around their expected value. Let us further assume the 
covariance matrix to be diagonal, that is, gene-wise velocities are independent—a 
reasonable assumption, as gene-wise velocities in velocyto
14 and scvelo15 are 
computed independently. To compute values for μ and Σv, consider velocity vector 
v and its K nearest neighbors. To estimate μ and the diagonal elements of Σv, 
we compute first- and second-order moments over the velocity vectors of these 
neighboring cells.
Propagating uncertainty into state assignments and fate probabilities. 
We seek to approximate the expected value of the final quantities of interest 
(state assignments and fate probabilities), given the distribution in the velocity 
vectors. Let q be a final quantity of interest. There are two main steps involved in 
computing q,
v → T → q,
where v stands for our inputs, that is, the velocity vectors, and T is the transition 
matrix defining the Markov chain. To get from v to T, we evaluate an analytical 
function that computes correlations and applies a softmax function. We can 
approximate this first part of the mapping with a Taylor series, which allows us 
to propagate analytically the distribution in v into T. For the second part of the 
mapping, we use the expected transition matrix to compute q. This yields an 
approximation to the expectation of the final quantity that we can then compare 
with the approximation we obtain from a MC scheme, which we treat as our 
ground truth.
Approximating the expected transition matrix. In the first step, we compute 
the expected value of the transition matrix, given the distribution of the velocity 
vectors. Given a particular draw v from the distribution and a set of state-change 
vectors {s
k}, we compute a vector of probabilities p, which lives on a K-simplex in 
RK. Let us denote the mapping from v to p by h,
h : RG → RK,
v �→ h(v)= p.
We can then formulate our problem as finding the expectation of h when 
applied to v, that is
E[h(v)]v∼N(μ,Σv ) .
To approximate this, expand the ith component of h in a Taylor series around μ,
hi(v)= hi(μ)+ ∇⊤
v hi(v)|μ (v − μ)+ 1
2 (v − μ)⊤ ∇2
v hi(v)|μ (v − μ)+ O(v − μ)3.
Define the Hessian matrix of hi at v = μ as
H(i) = ∇2
v hi(v)|μ .
Taking the expectation of hi and using the Taylor expansion,
E[hi(v)] ≈ hi(μ)+ 1
2 E[(v − μ)⊤ H(i) (v − μ)].
Note that the first-order term cancels as E[v−μ] = 0. The second-order term 
can be further simplified by explicitly writing out the matrix multiplication,
E[(v − μ)⊤ H(i)(v − μ)] =
G∑
j,k= 1
H(i)
j,k E[(v − μ)j(v − μ)k],
where we took the expectation inside the sum and the matrix elements outside the 
expectation as they do not involve v. For j≠k, the two terms inside the expectation 
involving v are independent given our distributional assumptions on v and the 
expectation can be taken separately. Using again the fact that E[v−μ] = 0, the sum 
equals zero for j≠k. It follows
G∑
j,k= 1
H(i)
j,k E[(v − μ)j(v − μ)k]=
∑
j
H(i)
j,j E[(vj − μj)2]=
∑
j
H(i)
j,j Var[vj].
To summarize, our second-order approximation to the transition probabilities 
given the distribution in v reads
E[hi(v)] ≈ hi(μ)+ 1
2
∑
j
H(i)
j,j Var[vj].
We use automatic differentiation as implemented in JAX96 to compute the 
Hessian matrices H(i), which ensures they are highly accurate and can be computed 
in a scalable manner. Further, because we do not hard-code the derivatives, our 
approach is highly flexible to future changes in the way we compute transition 
probabilities. If, for example, it turns out at a later point that an alternative metric 
works better than Pearson correlation, this is automatically taken care of in the 
propagation of uncertainties and no changes need to be made, apart from changing 
the forwards function that computes the transition probabilities themselves. The 
above procedure can be repeated for all components i and for all cells to yield 
the second-order approximation to the expected transition matrix T, given the 
distribution over each velocity vector.
Approximating the expected final quantities. To arrive at the final quantities of 
interest, that is, state assignments and absorption probabilities, we use the expected 
transition matrix and proceed as in the deterministic case. We validate that this 
approximation gives very similar results to a fully stochastic approach based 
on MC sampling (Extended Data Fig. 3f,g). The MC approach is also available 
through our kernel interface by setting mode = ‘sampling’ when calling the method 
to compute the transition matrix. Thus, the user can conveniently choose between 
a fast approximate method given by our analytical approximation and a slower, 
asymptotically exact, method given by MC sampling.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 18]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
The CellRank software package. The CellRank software package implements two 
main modules:
• kernels provide functionality to compute transition matrices based on 
(directed) single-cell data.
• estimators implement algorithms to perform inference based on kernels. For 
example, estimators compute macrostates and fate probabilities.
This modular and object-oriented design allows CellRank to be extended easily 
in two directions. Including more kernels can accommodate further directional 
single-cell data such as metabolic labeling or experimental time, while including 
more estimators enables learning new abstractions of cellular dynamics. The kernel 
module currently implements a
• VelocityKernel, which computes a transition matrix on the basis of a KNN 
graph and RNA velocity information.
• ConnectivityKernel, which row-normalizes the adjacency matrix underly-
ing the KNN graph to obtain a valid transition matrix. This is essentially the 
transition matrix used in the diffusion pseudotime (DPT)
7 algorithm.
• PrecomputedKernel, which accepts any precomputed transition matrix and 
allows for easy interfacing with the CellRank software.
All kernel classes are derived from a base kernel class that implements density 
normalization as implemented in Haghverdi et al.
7. Instances of kernel classes can 
be combined by simply using the ‘+’ operator, potentially including weights. A 
typical code snippet to compute a transition matrix will look like this:
from cellrank.tools.kernels import VelocityKernel, ConnectivityKernel
vk = VelocityKernel(adata).compute_transition_matrix()
ck = ConnectivityKernel(adata).compute_transition_matrix()
combined_kernel = 0.9*vk + 0.1*ck
The estimator module currently implements a
• CFLARE estimator. CFLARE (Clustering and Filtering of Left and Right 
Eigenvectors) computes terminal states directly by filtering cells in the top 
left eigenvectors and clustering them in the top right eigenvectors, thereby 
combining ideas of spectral clustering and stationary distributions.
• GPCCA estimator.
All estimator classes are derived from a base estimator class that enables 
computing fate probabilities, regardless of how terminal/intermediate states 
have been computed. A typical code snippet to compute macrostates and fate 
probabilities is:
from cellrank.tools.estimators import GPCCA
# initialize the estimator
gpcca = GPCCA(combined_kernel)
# compute macrostates and identify the terminal states among them
gpcca.compute_macrostates()
gpcca.compute_terminal_states()
# compute fate probabilities
gpcca.compute_absorption_probabilities()
Both kernels and estimators implement a number of plotting functions to 
conveniently inspect results. We designed CellRank to be highly scalable to 
ever increasing cell numbers, widely applicable and extendable to problems in 
single-cell dynamical inference, user friendly with tutorials and comprehensive 
documentation, and robust with large code coverage through unit tests. CellRank 
is open source, fully integrated with SCANPY and scVelo and freely available at 
https://cellrank.org.
Computing gene expression trends along lineages. CellRank computes fate 
probabilities that specify how likely each cell is to transition towards each identified 
terminal state (Computing fate probabilities). Combined with any pseudotemporal 
measure, this allows us to compute and compare gene expression trends towards 
specific terminal populations. In contrast to other methods like FateID
51 or PAGA8, 
we do not define each lineage via a discrete assignment of cells obtained through a 
threshold or a clustering. Instead, we use all cells to fit each lineage, but we weight 
each cell according to its fate probability—our measure of lineage membership. 
Uncommitted cells can thus contribute to two or more fates, weighted by fate 
probabilities, while committed cells will be naturally excluded from alternative 
fates by virtue of fate probabilities nearing zero in these lineages.
Pseudotemporal orderings. CellRank itself does not compute a pseudotemporal 
ordering of cells, as there are many established algorithms for this task, including 
DPT
7, scVelo’s latent time15 or Palantir’s pseudotime21. A weak spot of these 
methods is that they rely on an initial cell to anchor their pseudotemporal 
ordering, whereas CellRank is the only method that can computationally identify 
initial states. Pseudotemporal orderings can be fed into CellRank, where we 
combine it with fate probabilities to compute gene expression trends along lineages. 
As mentioned above, fate probabilities are essential to make the gene expression 
trends specific to any particular lineage, by weighting each cell according to its 
contribution to that lineage.
Imputing gene expression recovers trends from noisy data. To improve the 
robustness and resolution of gene expression trends, we adapt two strategies: 
imputed gene expression values and GAMs. For gene expression imputation, we 
use MAGIC
67 by default; however, any imputed gene expression matrix can be 
supplied. MAGIC is based on KNN imputation and makes use of the covariance 
structure among neighboring cells to estimate expression levels for each gene. The 
KNN graph is computed globally, based on the expression values of all genes and 
not just the one we are currently considering.
GAMs robustly fit gene expression values. Sliding window approaches are 
sensitive to local density differences and take only the current gene into account 
when determining gene expression trends. In contrast, we fit GAMs to expression 
values that have been imputed by borrowing information from neighboring cells 
via a KNN graph, allowing us to flexibly model many kinds of gene trends in a 
robust and scalable manner. We fit the expression trend for lineage t (associated 
with terminal state t) in gene g via
ygi = β0 + f(τi)∀i :Fit > 0, (4)
where ygi is gene expression of gene g in cell i, τi is the pseudo temporal value of cell 
i and F is the fate matrix (Computing fate probabilities). By default, we use cubic 
splines for the smoothing functions f as these have been shown to be effective in 
capturing nonlinear relationships in trends97.
To visualize the smooth trend, we select 200 equally spaced testing points along 
pseudotime, and predict gene expression at each of them using the fitted model 
of equation (4). To estimate uncertainty along the trend, we use the s.d. of the 
residuals of the fit, given by
σˆyp =
√ ∑ n
j= 1(yj − ˆyj)2
n − 2
√
1 + 1
n + (τp − ¯τ)2
∑ n
j= 1(τj − ¯τ)2 ,
where ˆyp denotes predicted gene expression at test point p, ¯τ denotes average 
pseudotime across all cells and n is the number of test points98. For the fitting of 
equation (4), we provide interfaces to both the R package mgcv99,100 as well as the 
Python package pyGAM101. We parallelize gene fitting to scale well in the number 
of genes, which is important when plotting heatmaps summarizing many gene 
expression trends.
Visualizing gene expression trends for the pancreas example. For CellRank’s gene 
expression trends of lineage-associated genes along the alpha, beta, epsilon and delta 
fates, we used Palantir’s pseudotime
21, MAGIC imputed data67 and the mgcv99,100 
package to fit GAMs in a cubic spline basis. For the delta lineage, fate probabilities 
among early cells were very low (0.01 average fate probability among Ngn3 high EP 
cells; Fig. 2e). This reflects the small size of the delta population (70 cells or 3% of 
the data; Supplementary Fig. 10a,b) as well as the fact that delta cells are produced 
mostly at later stages in pancreatic development
37. To still be able to reliably fit gene 
expression of early cells along the delta lineage, we clip weights below 0.01 to this 
threshold value. This was done only for the fitting of gene expression trends.
Clustering gene expression trends. CellRank can cluster gene expression trends 
along a particular lineage to recover the main patterns of (transient) up- or 
downregulation towards a specific terminal state. We recover regulation of our 
gene set of interest along a specific lineage by fitting GAMs in pseudotime, 
supplying fate probabilities as cell-level lineage weights. Next, we cluster the 
GAM-smoothed gene expression trends. For this, we z-transform expression values 
and compute a principal component analysis (PCA) representation of the trends. 
By default, we use 50 PCs. We then compute a KNN graph in PC space and cluster 
the KNN graph using the louvain
68 or leiden102 algorithms. For each recovered 
cluster, we compute its mean and s.d. (pointwise, for all testing points that were 
used for smoothing) and visualize them, together with the individual, smoothed 
trends per cluster. As gene-trend fitting is efficiently parallelized in CellRank, such 
an analysis can be performed in an unbiased fashion for large gene sets. For 10,000 
genes, the runtime is about 6 min on a 2019 Macbook pro with a 2.8 GHz Intel 
Core i7 processor and 16 GB RAM.
Clustering gene expression trends towards the delta fate. To cluster gene 
expression trends towards the delta fate in Fig. 3e, all genes expressed in at least 
ten cells were included (12,987 genes). Smooth gene expression trends along the 
delta lineage were determined using Palantir’s pseudotime
21. We used K = 30 for the 
gene-trend KNN graph and the Louvain algorithm with resolution parameter set to 
0.2 to avoid overclustering the trends.
Uncovering putative driver genes. To find genes that are expressed at high levels 
in cells that are biased towards a particular fate, we compute Person’s correlation 
between expression levels of a set of genes and fate probabilities. We sort genes 
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 19]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
by their correlation values and consider high-scoring genes as candidate drivers. 
By default, we consider all genes that have passed preprocessing gene-filtering 
thresholds. The computation of correlation values can be restricted to a set of 
predefined clusters if one is interested in driver genes that act in a certain region of 
the phenotypic manifold.
Uncovering putative driver genes for delta development. To uncover putative 
driver genes towards the delta fate in Fig. 3d,e, we considered 12,987 genes that 
were expressed in at least ten cells. We computed correlation of total-count 
normalized, log-transformed gene expression values with the probability of 
becoming a delta cell. We restricted correlation computation to the Fev+ cluster, 
where we expected the fate decision towards delta to occur.
Robustness analysis. We were interested in evaluating how much CellRank’s fate 
probabilities change in response to changes in the following key preprocessing 
parameters:
• Weight given to transcriptomic similarities via the λ parameter;
• Number of neighbors K used for KNN graph construction;
• scVelo’s gene-filtering parameter "minsharedcounts", which determines how 
many counts a gene must have in both spliced and unspliced layers;
• scVelo’s gene-filtering parameter "ntopgenes", which determines the number 
of most highly variable genes used for the velocity computation;
• Number of PCs "npcs" used for KNN graph construction.
In addition, we were interested to see how much CellRank’s results change 
when we randomly subsample the number of cells to 90% of the original cell 
number and when we vary the number of macrostates. We used the pancreas 
example
24 in all of the following comparisons.
Robustness with respect to key preprocessing parameters. To evaluate robustness 
to preprocessing parameters, we varied only one parameter at a time and 
computed macrostates and their associated fate probabilities. We then compared 
fate probabilities for different parameter values by computing pairwise Pearson 
correlation among all possible pairs of parameter values. We did this separately for 
the alpha, beta, epsilon and delta lineages. For each lineage, we recorded the median 
and minimum correlation achieved across all the different comparisons. We always 
computed enough macrostates so that the alpha, beta, epsilon and delta states were 
included. Naturally, the precise location of the terminal states changed slightly 
across parameter combinations. For this reason, the correlation values we recorded 
reflect robustness of the entire CellRank workflow, including both the computation 
of terminal states as well as fate probabilities. In a separate comparison, we 
were interested in evaluating the robustness of just the last step of the CellRank 
algorithm, that is the computation of fate probabilities. For this, we kept the 
terminal states fixed across parameter variations and proceeded as above otherwise, 
computing pairwise Pearson correlations among fate probabilities per lineage across 
all parameter value combinations. To test whether CellRank’s robustness changes 
when we propagate uncertainty, we repeated all the aforementioned computations 
using our analytical approximation to propagate uncertainty.
Statistical testing of increased robustness due to uncertainty propagation. 
To check whether propagating uncertainty increased robustness with respect to 
K used during neighborhood graph construction, we fixed the terminal states 
and computed pairwise correlations with and without uncertainty propagation. 
This yielded ten correlation values per lineage per method. We then applied a 
one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test separately for each lineage using the scipy
89 
implementation with an exact distribution for the test statistic. This test assumes 
paired data, and that each pair is drawn independently. Pairs in our case are given 
by correlations of fate probabilities for two different numbers of neighbors, K, 
computed with and without uncertainty propagation. We assume these to be paired 
as the same number of neighbors probably yields similar correlation values with 
and without uncertainty propagation. For the alpha, beta and epsilon lineages, 
this yielded the same test statistic because the signed ranks of the differences 
in correlation between uncertainty/no uncertainty propagation were the same, 
that is, uncertainty propagation always yielded higher correlation values and the 
one-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test does not consider the actual magnitude of the 
differences, but just their sign and rank.
Robustness with respect to random subsampling of cells. We subsampled the 
data to 90% of cells, computed macrostates and fate probabilities towards the alpha, 
beta, epsilon and delta states. We repeated this 20 times, recorded all computed 
fate probabilities and compared them pairwise per lineage using Pearson’s 
correlation for all possible pairs of random draws. As in the above evaluation for 
the key preprocessing parameters, we recorded minimum and median correlation 
per lineage across all pairs and we repeated this for fixed terminal states and for 
propagated uncertainty.
Robustness with respect to the number of macrostates. To evaluate sensitivity 
with respect to this parameter, we varied the number of macrostates between 10 
and 16 and confirmed that, inside this range, the key terminal and initial states 
exist and remain in the same location.
Pancreas data example. We used an scRNA-seq time-series dataset comprising 
embryonic days 12.5−15.5 of pancreatic development in mice assayed using 10x 
Genomics
24. We restricted the data to the last timepoint (E15.5) and to the Ngn3 
low EP , Ngn3 high EP , Fev+ and endocrine clusters to focus on the late stages 
of endocrinogenesis where all of alpha, beta, epsilon and delta fates are present. 
For the main analysis of Figs. 2 and 3, we filtered out cycling cells to amplify 
the differentiation signal. In Extended Data Fig. 6, we include these cycling 
populations and show that convoluted signals of differentiation and proliferation 
pose no problem to CellRank. Our final subset for Figs. 2 and 3 contained 2,531 
cells. We kept the original cluster annotations, which were available on a coarse 
level and on a fine level. On the fine level, the Fev+ cluster was subclustered into 
different populations biased towards different endocrine fates (Fig. 3a).
Data preprocessing and velocity computation for the pancreas example. 
We used scVelo
15 and SCANPY76 with mostly default parameters. Loom files 
containing raw spliced and unspliced counts were obtained by running the 
velocyto14 command-line pipeline. We filtered genes to be expressed in at least 
ten cells and to have at least 20 counts in both spliced and unspliced layers. We 
further normalized by total counts per cell, log-transformed the data and kept the 
top 2,000 highly variable genes. We then computed a PCA representation of the 
data and used the top 30 PCs to compute a KNN graph with K = 30. For velocity 
computation, we used scVelo’s dynamic model of splicing kinetics. We evaluate 
the robustness of CellRank’s results to changes in these preprocessing parameters 
(Robustness analysis).
Embedding computation for the pancreas example. We used the KNN graph 
to compute a PAGA
8 representation of the data. The PAGA graph was used to 
initialize the computation of a UMAP28 representation of the data. Note that 
UMAP was used only to visualize the data and was not supplied to CellRank to 
compute the transition matrix or any downstream quantities.
CellRank parameters for the pancreas example. We used CellRank’s analytical 
stochastic approximation to compute transition probabilities and included a 
diffusion kernel with weight 0.2. We computed 12 macrostates and automatically 
detected the terminal alpha, beta and epsilon states. The delta population was 
picked up automatically as a macrostate. We manually assigned it the terminal 
label.
Statistical testing of Fev+ subcluster delta fate bias. To check whether Fev+ delta 
cells were assigned significantly higher delta fate probability compared with other 
Fev+ clusters by CellRank, we applied a two-sided Welch unequal variances t-test. 
The test assumes two independent normally distributed samples with unequal 
variances and checks whether their means are significantly different.
Comparing fate probabilities with observed cell-type frequencies. The pancreas 
system involves the nonhomeostatic generation of endocrine cells, and is thus not 
in steady state. In such a setting, we do not expect fate probabilities to perfectly 
follow observed cell-type frequencies, as different populations are produced at 
different developmental stages. For example, while 19% of cells in the pancreas 
data are terminal alpha, it is well known that these have been produced at earlier 
stages of endocrinogenesis (around E12.5) and not at E15.5 (ref. 
37). However, 
these earlier alpha cells still exist at E15.5 and contribute to observed cell-type 
frequencies. It is a strength of CellRank that it correctly picks this up (Fig. 2e), and 
does not assign large fate probabilities for differentiating towards alpha cells at 
E15.5.
Lung data example. We used an scRNA-seq time-series dataset of lung 
regeneration following bleomycin injury in mice assayed using Drop-seq
52,53. It 
contains 18 timepoints comprising days 0–54 postinjury, with daily sampling from 
days 2–13 and wider lags between subsequent timepoints. Two replicate mice were 
used per timepoint. We restricted data to days 2–15 to ensure dense sampling. If 
timepoints are too far apart, RNA velocity cannot be used to predict the next likely 
cellular state because linear extrapolation is meaningful only on the time scales of 
the splicing kinetics. Our final subset contained 24,882 cells. We kept the original 
cluster annotations.
Data preprocessing and velocity computation for the lung example. We used 
scVelo and SCANPY with mostly default parameters. Loom files containing 
raw spliced and unspliced counts were obtained by running the velocyto
14 
command-line pipeline. We filtered genes to be expressed in at least ten cells and to 
have at least 20 counts in both spliced and unspliced layers. We further normalized 
by total counts per cell, log-transformed the data and kept the top 2,000 highly 
variable genes. We kept the PCA coordinates from the original study and computed 
a KNN graph with K = 30 using the top 50 PCs. For velocity computation, we used 
scVelo’s dynamical model of splicing kinetics.
Embedding computation for the lung example. The lung data was processed in 
three separate batches. We used BBKNN
103 to compute a batch corrected KNN 
graph with ten neighbors in each batch. The corrected KNN graph was used to 
compute a UMAP representation of the data. Note that UMAP was used only to 
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 20]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
visualize the data and was not supplied to CellRank to compute the transition 
matrix or any downstream quantities. We did not use BBKNN to correct the 
graph we used for velocity computation as it is an open question how to do 
batch correction for velocity computation. We used uncorrected data for velocity 
computation.
CellRank parameters for the lung example. We used the analytical stochastic 
approximation of CellRank to compute transition probabilities and included a 
diffusion kernel with weight 0.2. On the full data of Fig. 6a, we computed nine 
macrostates. On the reduced data of Supplementary Fig. 16a, we computed three 
macrostates.
Defining stages of the differentiation trajectory. We reran CellRank on the 
subset of goblet and basal cells to investigate the trajectory at higher resolution. 
CellRank automatically detected initial and terminal states and computed fate 
probabilities towards the terminal states (Supplementary Fig. 16a–c). Further, 
we applied Palantir to the subset to compute a pseudotime (Supplementary 
Fig. 16d,e). We combined pseudotime with CellRank’s fate probabilities to define 
three stages of the dedifferentiation trajectory by requiring cells to have at least 
0.66 basal probability. Cells passing this threshold were assigned to three bins of 
equal size along the pseudotemporal axis. We used this binning to define the three 
stages of the trajectory.
Reprogramming data example. We used an scRNA-seq time-series dataset of 
MEFs in vitro reprogramming towards iEPs
48 across a 28-day time course of 
retroviral overexpression of Foxa1 and Hnf4a49. The original dataset contains 
104,887 cells assayed using 10x and Drop-seq53. We analyzed the subset of 48,515 
cells shown in figure 3 of Biddy et al.49, which is enriched for later stages of 
reprogramming and contains only cells assayed using 10x. We kept the original 
cluster annotations, the original 2D t-SNE embedding to visualize the data and the 
CellTag-derived successful versus dead-end labels from Biddy et al.
49.
Data preprocessing and velocity computation for the reprogramming example. 
We used scVelo
15 and SCANPY76 with mostly default parameters. Loom files 
containing raw spliced and unspliced counts were obtained by running the 
velocyto
14 command-line pipeline. We filtered genes to have at least 20 counts 
in both spliced and unspliced layers. We further normalized by total counts 
per cell, log-transformed the data and kept the top 2,000 highly variable genes. 
We computed a 30 nearest neighbor graph in the top 30 PCs and ran scVelo’s 
dynamical model of splicing kinetics to compute velocities.
CellRank parameters for the reprogramming example. We use CellRank’s 
analytical stochastic approximation to compute transition probabilities and include 
a diffusion kernel with weight 0.2. We computed five macrostates.
Comparing CellRank fate probabilities with CellTag labels. We sought to 
compare CellRank-computed fate probabilities towards the successful and 
dead-end terminal states (Fig. 4c) to CellTag-derived ground truth labels from 
the original publication
49 via a classification task. Ground truth labels were binary 
(successful/dead-end) and available for a subset of all cells. We restricted the 
comparison to days 12, 15 and 21 where ground truth labels were available for 
374, 582 and 1,312 cells, respectively. More ground truth labels were available for 
dead-end than for successful cells, which can give rise to misleading classification 
accuracy. We therefore subsampled dead-end cells until the proportions were 
even. For classification, we randomly assigned 60% of labeled cells per day 
into the training set and the remaining cells into the test set. Our final cell sets 
contained 208 (124 training/84 testing), 308 (184 training/124 testing) and 652 
(391 training/261 testing) cells for days 12, 15 and 21, respectively. We trained 
logistic regression classifiers independently for each day to predict the ground 
truth success/dead-end labels based on CellRanks fate probabilities on the training 
set using the scikit-learn implementation
104. To assess predictive performance, 
we computed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for each day on the 
test set. In short, ROC curves are created by iterating over the decision threshold 
used to classify points as successful/dead-end, computing and plotting the true 
positive rate against the false positive rate for each decision threshold
105. For each 
day, we also compute the area under the ROC curve (AUC). The AUC is a measure 
between 0 and 1 to summarize the entire ROC curve into a single value, which is 
then threshold-independent. A value of 1 corresponds to perfect classification, 0.5 
corresponds to random guessing, that is, an uninformative classifier.
Immunofluorescence stainings and microscopy on airway epithelial 
cells. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded lung sections (3.5 μm thick) from 
bleomycin-treated mice at day 10 (n = 2) and day 22 (n = 2) after bleomycin 
instillation, and from PBS-treated controls (n = 2) were stained as previously 
described
52. In brief, after deparaffinization, rehydration and heat-mediated 
antigen retrieval with citrate buffer (10 mM, pH 6.0), sections were blocked with 
5% bovine serum albumin for 1 h at room temperature and then incubated with the 
following primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C: rabbit anti-Bpifb1 (kindly provided 
by C. Bingle106, 1:500), mouse anti-Trp63 (abcam, catalog no. ab735, clone A4A, 
1:50) and chicken anti-Krt5 (BioLegend, catalog no. Poly9059, 1:1,000).
The following secondary antibodies were used: Goat anti-rabbit Alexa 
Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, catalog no. A11008, 1:250), Goat anti-chicken Alexa 
Fluor 568 (Invitrogen, catalog no. A11041,1:250) and goat anti-mouse Alexa 
Fluor 647 (Invitrogen, catalog no. A21236, 1:250). Nuclei were visualized with 
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole.
Immunofluorescent images were acquired with an AxioImager.M2 microscope 
(Zeiss) using a Plan-Apochromat ×20/0.8 M27 objective. For quantification of 
immunofluorescence staining, five different intrapulmonary regions were recorded 
per mouse, and the percentage of positively stained cells normalized to the total 
number of airway cells was quantified manually using Fiji software (ImageJ, 
v.2.0.0).
Ethics statement. Pathogen-free 8- to 10-week-old female C57BL/6J mice were 
purchased from Charles River Germany and maintained at the appropriate 
biosafety level at constant temperature (20–24 °C) and humidity (45–65%) 
with a 12 h light cycle. Animals were allowed food and water ad libitum. All 
animal experiments were performed in accordance with the governmental and 
international guidelines and ethical oversight by the local government for the 
administrative region of Upper Bavaria (Germany), registered under 55.2-1-54-
2532-130-2014 and ROB-55.2-2532.Vet_02-16-208.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the 
Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Raw published data for the pancreas24, lung52 and reprogramming49 examples are 
available from the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession codes GSE132188, 
GSE141259 and GSE99915, respectively. Processed data, including spliced 
and unspliced count abundances, is available from figshare under https://doi.
org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5172299.
Code availability
The CellRank software package is available at https://cellrank.org including 
documentation, tutorials and examples. Jupyter notebooks to reproduce 
our analysis and figures are available at https://github.com/theislab/
cellrank_reproducibility.
References
 73. Hendriks, G.-J. et al. NASC-seq monitors RNA synthesis in single cells. Nat. 
Commun. 10, 3138 (2019).
 74. Röblitz, S. & Weber, M. Fuzzy spectral clustering by PCCA+: application to 
Markov state models and data classification. Adv. Data Anal. Classif. 7, 
147–179 (2013).
 75. Spivak, D. I. Metric realization of fuzzy simplicial sets. Self published notes 
https://math.mit.edu/~dspivak/files/metric_realization.pdf (2012).
 76. Wolf, F . A., Angerer, P . & Theis, F . J. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene 
expression data analysis. Genome Biol. 19, 15 (2018).
 77. Coifman, R. R. et al. Geometric diffusions as a tool for harmonic analysis 
and structure definition of data: diffusion maps. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 
102, 7426–7431 (2005).
 78. Soneson, C., Srivastava, A., Patro, R. & Stadler, M. B. Preprocessing choices 
affect RNA velocity results for droplet scRNA-seq data. PLoS Comput. Biol. 
17, e1008585 (2021).
 79. Raj, B. & Blencowe, B. J. Alternative splicing in the mammalian nervous 
system: recent insights into mechanisms and functional roles. Neuron 87, 
14–27 (2015).
 80. Martinez, N. M. & Lynch, K. W . Control of alternative splicing in immune 
responses: many regulators, many predictions, much still to learn. Immunol. 
Rev. 253, 216–236 (2013).
 81. Pan, Q., Shai, O., Lee, L. J., Frey, B. J. & Blencowe, B. J. Deep surveying of 
alternative splicing complexity in the human transcriptome by 
high-throughput sequencing. Nat. Genet. 40, 1413–1415 (2008).
 82. Wang, E. T. et al. Alternative isoform regulation in human tissue 
transcriptomes. Nature 456, 470–476 (2008).
 83. Reuter, B. Generalisierte Markov-Modellierung: Modellierung Irreversibler 
β-Amyloid-Peptid-Dynamik unter Mikrowelleneinfluss (Springer, 2020).
 84. Mucha, H.-J. Big Data Clustering: Data Preprocessing, Variable Selection and 
Dimension Reduction (WIAS, 2017).
 85. Golub, G. H. & Van Loan, C. F . Matrix Computations (JHU Press, 2013).
 86. Horn, R. A. & Johnson, C. R. Matrix Analysis (Cambridge Univ. Press, 
2012).
 87. Kube, S. & Weber, M. A coarse graining method for the identification of 
transition rates between molecular conformations. J. Chem. Phys. 126, 
024103 (2007).
 88. Weber, M. Meshless Methods in Conformation Dynamics. PhD Thesis, Freie 
Univ., Berlin (2006).
 89. Virtanen, P . et al. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific 
computing in Python. Nat. Methods 17, 261–272 (2020).
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 21]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
 90. Reuter, B., Weber, M., Fackeldey, K., Röblitz, S. & Garcia, M. E. Generalized 
Markov state modeling method for nonequilibrium biomolecular dynamics: 
exemplified on amyloid β conformational dynamics driven by an oscillating 
electric field. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 14, 3579–3594 (2018).
 91. Reuter, B. pyGPCCA: pyGPCCA - python GPCCA: Generalized Perron 
Cluster Cluster Analysis package to coarse-grain reversible and non-reversible 
Markov State Models. (Github) https://github.com/msmdev/pyGPCCA
 92. Hernandez, V ., Roman, J. E. & Vidal, V . SLEPc: a scalable and flexible 
toolkit for the solution of eigenvalue problems. ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 
31, 351–362 (2005).
 93. Dalcin, L. D., Paz, R. R., Kler, P . A. & Cosimo, A. Parallel distributed 
computing using Python. Adv. Water Resour. 34, 1124–1139 (2011).
 94. Tolver, A. An introduction to Markov chains. (Univ. of Copenhagen, 2016).
 95. Saad, Y . & Schultz, M. H. GMRES: a generalized minimal residual 
algorithm for solving nonsymmetric linear systems. SIAM J. Sci. Stat. 
Comput. 7, 856–869 (1986).
 96. Frostig, R., Johnson, M. & Leary, C. Compiling machine learning programs 
via high-level tracing. In Proc. SYSML ’18, February 2018, Stanford, CA USA 
https://cs.stanford.edu/~rfrostig/pubs/jax-mlsys2018.pdf (2018).
 97. Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Generalized additive models. SSO Schweiz. 
Monatsschr. Zahnheilkd. 1, 297–310 (1986).
 98. DeSalvo, J. S. Standard error of forecast in multiple regression: proof of a 
useful result. (Rand Corporation, 1970).
 99. Mgcv: Mixed GAM computation vehicle with automatic smoothness 
estimation. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2019) https://
CRAN.R-project.org/package=mgcv
 100. Wood, S. N. Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with R. 
(CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group, 2017).
 101. Servén, D., Brummitt, C. pyGAM: Generalized additive models in Python. 
Preprint at Zenodo https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1476122 (2018).
 102. Traag, V . A., Waltman, L. & van Eck, N. J. From Louvain to Leiden: 
guaranteeing well-connected communities. Sci. Rep. 9, 5233 (2019).
 103. Polański, K. et al. BBKNN: fast batch alignment of single cell 
transcriptomes. Bioinformatics 36, 964–965 (2020).
 104. Pedregosa, F . et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. 
Res. 12, 2825–2830 (2011).
 105. Fawcett, T. An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 27, 
861–874 (2006).
 106. Musa, M. et al. Differential localisation of BPIFA1 (SPLUNC1) and BPIFB1 
(LPLUNC1) in the nasal and oral cavities of mice. Cell Tissue Res. 350, 
455–464 (2012).
 107. Tirosh, I. et al. Dissecting the multicellular ecosystem of metastatic 
melanoma by single-cell RNA-seq. Science 352, 189–196 (2016).
 108. Byrnes, L. E. et al. Lineage dynamics of murine pancreatic development at 
single-cell resolution. Nat. Commun. 9, 3922 (2018).
Acknowledgements
We thank S. Tritschler for helping us with the biological interpretation of results, F . Paul 
for guidance regarding PCCA and GPCCA, G. Diez for pointing us to literature in the 
conformational protein dynamics field, J.L.R. López for his input to the implementation 
and T. Walzthoeni (Bioinformatics Core Facility, Institute of Computational Biology, 
Helmholtz Zentrum München) for bioinformatics support. We would further like to 
thank M. Weber for valuable discussions regarding irreversible Markov processes, M. 
Weber and A. Sikorski for pointing us to SLEPc for partial Schur decompositions of 
sparse matrices, J. Chan, G. Palla and L. Hubert for stimulating discussions and T. Nawy 
for helping to write the manuscript. This work was supported by the BMBF (grant no. 
01IS18036B and grant no. 01IS18053A), the Helmholtz Association’s Initiative and 
Networking Fund through Helmholtz AI [ZT-I-PF-5-01] and sparse2big [ZT-I-0007] and 
the NCI (Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA08748). M. Lange further acknowledges 
financial support by the DFG through the Graduate School of QBM (GSC 1006), by the 
Joachim Herz Stiftung and by the Bayer Foundation.
Author contributions
M.L. designed and developed the method, implemented CellRank, analyzed the data 
and wrote the Methods section. M.K. contributed to the implementation and to the data 
analysis including methods benchmarks. B.R. developed the original GPCCA code, 
implemented the pyGPCCA package (with contributions from M.K. and M.L.) and 
helped integrate it into CellRank. V .B. contributed to the implementation and helped 
to harmonize CellRank with scVelo and SCANPY . M.S. helped with the design of the 
method and the presentation of results. M.B. and H.L. interpreted the relevance of the 
method for inferring developmental trajectories in the pancreas data. H.B.S, J.S. and 
M.A. interpreted the relevance of the method for inferring regeneration trajectories in 
the lung; H.B.S and J.S. experimentally validated the dedifferentiation hypothesis. F .J.T. 
and D.P . supervised the project and contributed to the conception of the project. M.L., 
F .J.T. and D.P . wrote the manuscript with contributions from the coauthors. All authors 
read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
Open access funding provided by Helmholtz Zentrum München - Deutsches 
Forschungszentrum für Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH).
Competing interests
F .J.T. consults for Immunai Inc., Singularity Bio B.V ., CytoReason Ltd and Omniscope 
Ltd, and has ownership interest in Dermagnostix GmbH and Cellarity. D.P . is on the 
scientific advisory board of Insitro, Inc. and reports ownership interests in the company. 
The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Extended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01346-6.
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material 
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-021-01346-6.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Dana Pe’ er or Fabian J. Theis.
Peer review information Nature Methods thanks Samantha A. Morris and the other, 
anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Lin Tang 
was the primary handling editor, in collaboration with the Nature Methods team.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 22]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 1 | The CellRank algorithm. a–h. CellRank combines transcriptional similarity with velocity information to infer cell state trajectories. 
The algorithm starts with a pair of count matrices containing spliced and unspliced mRNA counts (a), computes a kNN graph in the space of principal 
components (b), uses scVelo or velocyto to compute RNA velocity vectors (c), and then combines the kNN graph with the velocity vectors to assign 
transition probabilities to graph edges (d). Arrow thickness indicates transition probability. A cell–cell transition matrix summarizes these probabilities. 
CellRank coarse-grains this matrix to compute macrostates, which it classifies as initial, intermediate or terminal (e), and then computes fate probabilities 
towards the terminal macrostates (f). Pseudotime is determined using an imported method such as Palantir, scVelo’s latent time or an alternative, based 
on macrostates defined by CellRank (g). The CellRank toolbox offers a number of downstream functionalities to visualize and extract information from 
pseudotime and cell fate probability vectors (see Methods), including the ability to combine these two quantities to chart smooth gene expression trends (h).
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 23]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 2 | See next page for caption.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 24]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 2 | GPCCA and fate probabilities extract the essence of cellular state transitions. a. Markov transition graph of a toy example of 
cellular state changes. Starting from a cyclic initial state, cells transition via an intermediate state into either one of two terminal states, both of which are 
cycling again. Note that cell number 3 is more likely to go to cell number 4 than 5, which results in a global fate bias towards the first terminal state. b. The 
corresponding transition matrix can be decomposed into real Schur vectors, each corresponding to one eigenvalue. The 4 eigenvalues close to one are 
associated with the initial, terminal and intermediate states. Complex eigenvalues appear because the transition matrix is nonsymmetric. c. The original 
transition matrix. The block structure shows the separation into the 4 macrostates and the possible transitions between them. d. The coarse-grained 
transition matrix, identifying the different macrostates and their transition probabilities relative to one another. The initial state is the macrostate with 
almost no incoming but large outgoing transition probability. The intermediate state is the state with both large incoming and large outgoing transition 
probability, and relatively little self-transition probability. The terminal states are the states with large incoming, but almost no outgoing and large self-
transition probability. e. each macrostate is associated with a membership vector that assigns cells to the state in a soft fashion, that is using weights that 
sum to one. We show the 4 membership vectors in a heatmap. f. Fate probabilities towards the two terminal states. We correctly recover the global bias 
towards the first terminal state.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 25]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 3 | uncertainty propagation adjusts for noise in RNA velocity vectors. a. When predicting the future state of cell x0, CellRank takes 
uncertainty in the velocity vector v in the high-dimensional gene space into account. b. Propagating noise changes the transition probabilities from one 
cell to its nearest neighbors. c. The adjusted transition probabilities agglomerate over longer paths to result in adjusted fate probabilities. d. effect of 
noise propagation, illustrated using pancreas data. One cell from a low noise region, where velocity vectors from neighboring cells tend to point in the 
same direction (top), and one from a high noise region, where vectors from neighboring cells point in different directions (bottom), are highlighted. 
e. T ransition probabilities from the reference cell to its 10 nearest neighbors using a deterministic or stochastic (analytical approximation or Monte 
Carlo sampling-based) formulation, for both the low and high noise cell. Corrections applied by stochastic approaches are larger in the high noise 
region. f. Subclustering of the Fev+ cluster in the pancreas data
24. g. Comparing average fate probabilities per subcluster. These were obtained from not 
propagating (‘deterministic’) or propagating (‘stochastic – analytical’ and ‘stochastic – sampling’) velocity uncertainty. Both stochastic approaches agree 
in down-weighting probability towards the dominant beta fate and up-weighting probability towards the alpha, delta and epsilon fates.NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 26]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 4 | Recovering structure in the transition matrix. a. Heatmap of the transition matrix for the pancreas dataset from Fig. 2a. The 
ordering of cells (rows and columns) in the matrix is arbitrary. The colorbar has been adjusted such that values larger than the 90th percentile are clipped 
to the 90th percentile to avoid skewing the colorbar towards extreme values. However, there is still no visible structure in the matrix because of sparsity, 
noise and the random order of cells. b. Same matrix as in (a), just re-ordered such that cells which likely belong to the same macrostate are next to each 
other. This recovers the structure of the developmental dynamics. Note that the sparsity structure of the matrix is symmetric (KNN graph is symmetric) 
while the actual values are not (RNA velocity infused directionality). c. Coarse-grained transition matrix from Fig. 2. Macrostates defined in this matrix 
were used to reorder cells in (b).
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 27]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 5 | Marker genes confirm CellRanks initial and terminal state annotations in the pancreas data. a. CellRank-computed initial and 
terminal states from Fig. 2d. b. Cells are colored based on the expression level of the indicated gene in each UMAP. The terminal states express the key 
marker genes relevant for each respective cell type. Showing for beta: Ins1 and Ins2 (insulin), alpha: Gcg (glucagon), epsilon: Ghrl (ghrelin), delta: Sst 
(somatostatin)
33. For the initial state, we show expression of ductal cell markers Sox9, Anxa2 and Bicc124,33.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 28]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 6 | CellRank recovers ductal and endocrine maturation. a. Published15 UMAP of the pancreas data24, colored by original cluster 
annotations, including all clusters in Fig. 2 as well as ductal cells. Streamlines show scVelo15 velocities. b. Cell cycle scores for S and G2M phase, computed 
using scanpy76 based on the gene set from ref. 107. Cycling cells mainly map to the ductal cluster. c. Spectrum of the CellRank-computed transition matrix. 
An eigengap appears after the first 5 eigenvalues, suggestive of 5 macrostates. d. UMAP showing 5 macrostates. e. Coarse-grained transition matrix. 
Diagonal elements give the stability index (SI) values. These automatically identify the Ductal 2, epsilon, Alpha and Beta macrostates to be terminal. f. 
Fate probabilities towards the Ductal 2 state (‘ductal fate probability’). Among the 25 genes that correlate best with ductal fate probability in the ductal/
Ngn3
low clusters is Sox9, an established marker for ductal cell maturation33. g. Combined fate probabilities towards the Alpha, Beta and epsilon macrostates 
(‘endocrine fate probability’). Among the 10 genes that correlate best with endocrine fate probability in the ductal/Ngn3low clusters are Ngn3 and Insm1, 
which are established endocrine progenitor markers33. Inset shows endocrine fate probabilities in the ductal/Ngn3low clusters. h. Ngn3 expression for the 
subset of cells shown in (g). Ngn3 expression correlates best with endocrine fate probabilities (Pearson correlation = 0.66).
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 29]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 7 | Splicing kinetics do not capture delta cell development. a. Phase portraits of the top 30 genes which are assigned the highest 
likelihoods by scVelo’s dynamical model of the mRNA lifecycle. Unspliced counts are on the x-axis, spliced counts are on the y-axis. Cells are colored 
according to the clusters from Fig. 2a. The solid purple curve is scVelo’s dynamical fit and the dashed purple line is scVelo’s inferred steady-state ratio. The 
top 30 genes are dominated by drivers for the alpha (Gcg
33), epsilon (Ghrl33) and beta (Gng12108, Pdx134,70) lineages while delta drivers are not present. b. 
Phase portraits of known delta-associated genes Hhex35 and Cd24a38,39 as well as the CellRank-identified putative lineage driver Hadh. Cd24a was filtered 
out by scVelo’s gene filtering threshold because it only had unspliced counts in 3 cells (see box). Hhex could not be fit by scVelo because of too little 
expression and too large noise levels. Hadh could be fit by scVelo, however, delta cells are an outlier in this fit (see box) and were not correctly assigned to 
the steady-state. Thus, all three genes do not meaningfully contribute to velocity vectors towards delta cells.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 30]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 8 | Projected velocities do not reveal how delta cells are generated. scVelo velocities projected onto the UMAP do not reveal a likely 
path towards delta cells. Velocities reveal short-range fate relationships but cannot be combined to give long-range fate predictions from looking at an 
embedding.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 31]

ArticlesNAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 9 | Cluster labels and timepoint annotations for lung data. a. Original cluster labels for the lung regeneration data52 in a UMAP 
projection. The data contains 24,882 murine lung epithelial cells sequenced using the Drop-seq workflow53 at 13 timepoints spanning days 2–15 past 
bleomycin injury. The ‘activated’ label refers to cell states that emerge after bleomycin injury. b. Same as (a) with timepoints colored in. Time points refer 
to time passed since bleomycin injury. c. expression of goblet cell markers Muc5b, Muc5ac and Bpifb1 agrees with the goblet annotation of (a).
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 32]

Articles NAtuRE MEtHODS
Extended Data Fig. 10 | CellRank predicts a goblet to basal dedifferentiation trajectory. a. Cellrank identifies 9 macrostates. Airway cells, including 
club, goblet and basal cells, are highlighted. b. Single-cell fate probabilities of transitioning towards the basal state. A ‘band’ of cells within the goblet 
cluster exhibits high basal probability. c. Single-cell fate probabilities of transitioning towards the goblet state. Basal cells do not show any probability of 
transitioning towards the goblet state. d. Quantification of the results from (b) and (c). Goblet cells have a large probability of transitioning towards basal 
cells, but basal cells have no probability of transitioning towards the goblet state, confirming that the recovered trajectory proceeds from goblet to basal.
NATuRe MeTHoDS | www.nature.com/ naturemethods


[PDF_PAGE 33]

1 nature research | reporting summaryApril 2020
Corresponding author(s): Fabian Theis, Dana Pe'er
Last updated by author(s): Oct 5, 2021
Reporting Summary
Nature Research wishes to improve the reproducibility of the work that we publish. This form provides structure for consistency and transparency 
in reporting. For further information on Nature Research policies, see our Editorial Policies and the Editorial Policy Checklist.
Statistics
For all statistical analyses, confirm that the following items are present in the figure legend, table legend, main text, or Methods section.
n/a Confirmed
The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement
A statement on whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one- or two-sided 
Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested
A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons
A full description of the statistical parameters including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) 
AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted 
Give P values as exact values whenever suitable.
For Bayesian analysis, information on the choice of priors and Markov chain Monte Carlo settings
For hierarchical and complex designs, identification of the appropriate level for tests and full reporting of outcomes
Estimates of effect sizes (e.g. Cohen's d, Pearson's r), indicating how they were calculated
Our web collection on statistics for biologists contains articles on many of the points above.
Software and code
Policy information about availability of computer code
Data collection No software was used for data collection.
Data analysis We used scVelo v0.2.4, scanpy v1.8.1 and cellrank v1.5.0. We share our software in an open-source package on github 
(https://cellrank.org), jupyter notebooks (jupyter_core v4.6.3) to reproduce our figures and analysis in a public github repository (https:// 
github.com/theislab/cellrank_reproducibility).
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors and 
reviewers. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data
Policy information about availability of data
All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable: 
- Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets 
- A list of figures that have associated raw data 
- A description of any restrictions on data availability
Raw published data for the pancreas, lung and reprogramming examples is available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession codes GSE132188, 
GSE141259 and GSE99915, respectively. Processed data, including spliced and unspliced count abundances, is available from figshare under https:// 
doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.c.5172299. 


[PDF_PAGE 34]

2 nature research | reporting summaryApril 2020
Field-specific reporting
Please select the one below that is the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
Life sciences Behavioural & social sciences Ecological, evolutionary & environmental sciences
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/documents/nr-reporting-summary-flat.pdf
Life sciences study design
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample size No sample size calculation was performed in this study. Sample sizes were based on previous experience that resulted in generation of 
statistically significant data.
Data exclusions Pancreas dataset: subset to the late stages of endocrinogenesis to focus on the process of Alpha, Beta, Epsilon and Delta fate establishment. 
Lung data: subset to days 2-15 to ensure that sampling is dense enough to have overlapping populations across timepoints, required for RNA 
velocity. Reprogramming data: subset to late stages of reprogramming, equivalent to Fig. 3 of original publication. See Methods for 
full details.
Replication For the experimental follow-up of the predicted dedifferentiation trajectory (Fig. 6), we assessed and quantified 10 intrapulmonary airway 
regions derived from two independent biological replicates, which gave similar findings.
Randomization Mice were randomized according to different treatment and time point groups.
Blinding Investigators were not blinded to group allocations due to unblinding by the treatment effect.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods
We require information from authors about some types of materials, experimental systems and methods used in many studies. Here, indicate whether each material, 
system or method listed is relevant to your study. If you are not sure if a list item applies to your research, read the appropriate section before selecting a response. 
Materials & experimental systems
n/a Involved in the study
Antibodies
Eukaryotic cell lines
Palaeontology and archaeology
Animals and other organisms
Human research participants
Clinical data
Dual use research of concern
Methods
n/a Involved in the study
ChIP-seq
Flow cytometry
MRI-based neuroimaging
Antibodies
Antibodies used Primary antibodies: rabbit anti-Bpifb1 (kindly provided and produced by C. Bingle, 1:500; Musa, M. et al. Differential 
localisation of BPIFA1 (SPLUNC1) and BPIFB1 (LPLUNC1) in the nasal and oral cavities of mice. Cell Tissue Res. 350, 
455–464 (2012)), mouse anti-Trp63 (abcam, ab735, clone 4A4, 1:50) and chicken anti-Krt5 (BioLegend, Poly9059, 1:1,000). 
Secondary antibodies: Goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor® 488 (Invitrogen, A11008, 1:250), Goat anti-chicken Alexa Fluor® 568 (Invitrogen, 
A11041,1:250) and goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor® 647 (Invitrogen, A21236, 1:250). Cell nuclei were visualized with 4',6-diamidino-2- 
phenylindole (DAPI).
Validation All antibodies used have been validated by the manufacturers (cf. antibodies above) and by multiple citations for use in 
immunofluorescence stainings. For Bpifb1: Musa, M. et al., Cell Tissue Res. 350, 455–464 (2012) and Bingle, L. et al., 
Histochem. Cell Biol. 138, 749–758 (2012). For Trp63: Kumar, P. A. et al., Cell vol. 147 525–538 (2011), and Zuo, W. et 
al., Nature 517, 616–620 (2015), For Krt5: Weiner, A. I. et al. NPJ Regen Med 4, 17 (2019).
Animals and other organisms
Policy information about studies involving animals; ARRIVE guidelines recommended for reporting animal research
Laboratory animals Pathogen-free eight to ten weeks old female C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Charles River Germany and maintained at 
the appropriate biosafety level at ambient temperature (20-24°C) and humidity (45-65%) with a 12 hour light cycle. 
Animals were allowed food and water ad libitum.


[PDF_PAGE 35]

3 nature research | reporting summaryApril 2020
Wild animals This study did not involve wild animals. 
Field-collected samples This study did not involve field-collected samples.
Ethics oversight All animal experiments were performed in accordance with the governmental and international guidelines and ethical oversight by 
the local government for the administrative region of Upper Bavaria (Germany), registered under 55.2-1-54-2532-130-2014 and 
ROB-55.2-2532.Vet_02-16-208. 
Note that full information on the approval of the study protocol must also be provided in the manuscript.