[PDF_PAGE 1]

Article
Scrublet: Computational Identiﬁcation of Cell
Doublets in Single-Cell Transcriptomic Data
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d We deﬁne two multiplet errors in single-cell RNA-seq data:
‘‘embedded’’ and ‘‘neotypic’’
d Neotypic errors can lead to misidentiﬁcation of cell types or
transitional states
d Scrublet code identiﬁes neotypic doublets and predicts the
overall doublet rate
d The algorithm is tested against several experimental methods
for labeling multiplets
Authors
Samuel L. Wolock, Romain Lopez,
Allon M. Klein
Correspondence
allon_klein@hms.harvard.edu
In Brief
Single-cell RNA-sequencing experiments
generate ‘‘multiplet errors’’ when multiple
cells are labeled with the same barcode.
Wolock et al. describe Scrublet, a method
for predicting the effects of multiplets on
downstream analyses and identifying
problematic multiplets. They validate the
method by applying Scrublet to several
datasets with independent knowledge of
multiplets.
+
Dimension 1
Dimension 2
+
Observed
transcriptome
Synthetic
doublet
Singlets
Doublets
Single-cell RNA-seq generates doublet artifacts
Doublet detection with Scrublet
Simulate doublets
from data
Calculate 
doublet scores
score
Cells Encapsulation
+ barcoding
Analysis
Wolock et al., 2019, Cell Systems 8, 281–291
April 24, 2019 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.11.005


[PDF_PAGE 2]

Cell Systems
Article
Scrublet: Computational Identiﬁcation of Cell
Doublets in Single-Cell Transcriptomic Data
Samuel L. Wolock, 1 Romain Lopez,1,2,3 and Allon M. Klein 1,4,*
1Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2Centre de Mathe´ matiques Applique´ es, E´ cole polytechnique, Palaiseau 91120, France
3Present address: Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California
94720, USA
4Lead Contact
*Correspondence: allon_klein@hms.harvard.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.11.005
SUMMARY
Single-cell RNA-sequencing has become a widely
used, powerful approach for studying cell popula-
tions. However, these methods often generate multi-
plet artifacts, where two or more cells receive the
same barcode, resulting in a hybrid transcriptome.
In most experiments, multiplets account for several
percent of transcriptomes and can confound down-
stream data analysis. Here, we present Single-Cell
Remover of Doublets (Scrublet), a framework for pre-
dicting the impact of multiplets in a given analysis
and identifying problematic multiplets. Scrublet
avoids the need for expert knowledge or cell clus-
tering by simulating multiplets from the data and
building a nearest neighbor classiﬁer. To demon-
strate the utility of this approach, we test Scrublet
on several datasets that include independent knowl-
edge of cell multiplets. Scrublet is freely available for
download at github.com/AllonKleinLab/scrublet.
INTRODUCTION
Single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a powerful and
accessible approach for studying complex biological systems.
It is quickly becoming a standard tool for unbiased characteriza-
tion of tissue cell types and high-resolution reconstruction of
differentiation trajectories ( Grifﬁths et al., 2018 ). Droplet micro-
ﬂuidic ( Klein et al., 2015; Macosko et al., 2015; Zheng et al.,
2017) and well-based ( Cao et al., 2017; Gierahn et al., 2017;
Han et al., 2018; Rosenberg et al., 2018 ) technologies now
enable the relatively inexpensive, high-throughput isolation and
barcoding of cell transcriptomes. However, these methods suf-
fer from the problem of cell multiplets, where a mixture of two
or more cells is reported as a single cell in the data.
Most scRNA-seq technologies co-encapsulate cells and bar-
coded primers in a small reaction volume (droplets or wells),
thereby associating the mRNA of each cell with a unique DNA
barcode. Multiplets arise when two or more cells are captured
within the same reaction, generating a hybrid transcriptome (Fig-
ure 1 A). Cell multiplets are a concern when interpreting the
outcome of scRNA-seq experiments because they suggest the
existence of intermediate cell states that may not actually exist
in the sample. Such artifactual states can confound downstream
analyses by appearing as distinct cell types, bridging cell states,
or interfering in differential gene expression tests and inference
of gene regulatory networks ( Figure 1B).
In a typical scRNA-seq experiment, at least several percent of
all capture events are multiplets ( Cao et al., 2017; Klein et al.,
2015; Macosko et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2017 ). Multiplets can
form as a result of cell aggregates or through random co-encap-
sulation of more than one cell per droplet or well. The rate of
random co-encapsulation can be reduced by processing very
dilute cell suspensions. However, in practice, it is often favorable
to work with high cell concentrations in order to capture a large
number of cells within a short amount of time and to reduce
reagent costs. Additionally, multiplets resulting from cell aggre-
gates cannot be eliminated by simply reducing cell concentra-
tion. Pre-sorting cells into wells can overcome these problems
(Jaitin et al., 2014; Picelli et al., 2013 ) but at a cost in throughput.
Thus, rather than avoiding multiplets, it would be useful to iden-
tify them, either computationally or through experimental means.
The Case for a Computational Approach to Multiplet
Inference
Ideally, one would identify multiplet events experimentally
through appropriate assay designs. At the time of writing, we
noted ﬁve existing experimental strategies for multiplet detec-
tion, summarized in Table 1 . However, none of the existing
methods can yet be implemented routinely for all scRNA-seq
experimental designs (see ‘‘Limitations’’ in Table 1 ). It would
therefore be useful to have a computational strategy to infer
the identity of multiplets directly from data.
Until now, two simple computational methods have been im-
plemented to exclude putative multiplets: (1) exclude cell barco-
des with unusually high numbers of detected transcripts; and (2)
manually curate data, excluding cell clusters that co-express
marker genes of distinct cell types ( Grifﬁths et al., 2018 ). Both
of these methods have drawbacks. As we will show later, the
former method often performs poorly because it assumes that
cells contain similar amounts of RNA, when in reality samples
with diverse cell types or cells in different cell cycle stages are
expected to have a wide range in the number of transcripts per
cell. The latter method requires expert knowledge and careful
annotation of the data.
Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019 ª 2018 Elsevier Inc. 281


[PDF_PAGE 3]

Below, we propose a computational approach, Single-Cell
Remover of Doublets (Scrublet), for identifying multiplets and
apply the method to several datasets that include some measure
of ‘‘ground truth’’ labels for cell multiplets. Brieﬂy, our method in-
volves two steps. First, doublets (multiplets of just two cells) are
simulated from the data by combining random pairs of observed
transcriptomes. Second, each observed transcriptome is scored
based on the relative densities of simulated doublets and
observed transcriptomes in its vicinity. The multiplet problem
is also addressed by a sister study published in this journal
(McGinnis et al., 2019 , this issue).
Deﬁning ‘‘Embedded’’ and ‘‘Neotypic’’ Multiplets
Multiplets can have varying consequences for downstream ana-
lyses, depending, in part, on whether they arise from averaged
measurements of cells with similar or qualitatively distinct gene
expression proﬁles (Figure 1B). We accordingly deﬁne two major
classes of multiplet-associated errors, formally deﬁned in the
STAR Methods in terms of the probability densities of singlet
and multiplet transcriptomes:
‘‘Embedded’’ errors are quantitative changes in the gene
expression and abundance of a cell state that occur when a
multiplet is grouped (or ‘‘embedded’’) with a large number of sin-
glets (i.e., transcriptomes of single cells) that dominate the state.
The impact of such errors should be small if multiplet events are
rare. We expect embedded errors to be caused by multiplets
arising from a combination of cells that are similar in gene
expression, e.g., of the same cell type.
‘‘Neotypic’’ errors generate new features in single-cell gene
expression data, such as clusters, ‘‘branches’’ from an existing
cluster, or ‘‘bridges’’ between clusters, and thus could lead to
qualitatively incorrect inferences from the data. Neotypic errors
are generated by multiplets of cells with distinct gene expres-
sion, e.g., of different cell lineage, maturity, spatial location, or
state of activation.
Algorithm overview
score
Doublet score
Singlet
Embedded
doublet
Neotypic
doublet
Build k-nearest-
neighbor graphCalculate fraction of
simulated doublet
neighbors
Simulate
doublets ( )
barcoded
primer beads
cells
Singlets
DoubletsEncapsulate
(droplets, 
wells)
AB
C
Singlet
Triplet
Doublet
Embedding dim. 1
Embedding dim. 2
Undetectable
doublets
(Embedded)
Detectable
doublets 
(Neotypic)
Embedded
Neotypic
Doublet formation Effect of doublets
Observed transcriptomes
Figure 1. A Computational Approach for
Identifying Doublets in Single-Cell RNA-Seq
Data
(A) Schematic of doublet formation. Multiple cells
are co-encapsulated with a single barcoded bead,
either randomly or as aggregates, resulting in the
generation of a hybrid transcriptome.
(B) Multiplets involving highly similar cells
(‘‘embedded’’) may be difﬁcult to distinguish from
single cells, while multiplets of dissimilar cells
(‘‘neotypic’’) generate qualitatively new features,
such as distinct clusters (left) or bridges (right).
(C) Overview of the Scrublet algorithm. Doublets are
simulated by randomly sampling and combining
observed transcriptomes, and the local density of
simulated doublets, as measured by a nearest
neighbor graph, is used to calculate a doublet score
for each observed transcriptome.
In practice, individual multiplet tran-
scriptomes might be classiﬁed as either
‘‘embedded multiplets’’ or ‘‘neotypic multi-
plets’’ (or neither, seeSTAR Methods), ac-
cording to the error that they induce. The
degree to which multiplets can be cleanly associated with these
two categories, however, will depend on the approach by which
the single-cell data has been analyzed. One choice of dimen-
sionality reduction, for example, might fail to separate a multiplet
from singlets, leading to an embedded error, whereas another
choice may succeed, leading to a neotypic error. As such, the
classiﬁcation of neotypic multiplets should be taken to be oper-
ational with respect to the speciﬁc approaches used in data anal-
ysis. Accordingly, Scrublet identiﬁes neotypic multiplets for a
given choice of data analysis.
Method
Scrublet estimates the fraction of multiplets causing neotypic
errors and offers a method to identify and remove them by
generating ‘‘simulated multiplets’’ through linear combinations
of randomly sampled observed cell transcriptomes. We have
restricted ourselves speciﬁcally to identifying doublets since
these make up > 97% of multiplets in an experiment with
a < 5% multiplet rate with full cell dissociation. However, in prin-
ciple, the approach could be readily extended to higher-order
multiplets.
Our method makes two assumptions. First, we assume that
among all observed transcriptomes, multiplets are relatively
rare events. The second assumption is that all cell states contrib-
uting to doublets are also present as single cells elsewhere in the
data. Conditions under which these assumptions might be inva-
lidated are considered in the Discussion. With these assump-
tions, we show that doublets simulated from empirical datasets
can be used to construct a ‘‘target-decoy’’ (Elias and Gygi, 2010)
k-nearest neighbor (KNN) classiﬁer capable of identifying dou-
blets, as shown schematically in Figure 1 C (Bayesian classiﬁer
derived in STAR Methods).
When the total fraction of transcriptomes expected to be dou-
blets is known a priori, the classiﬁer outputs a posterior likelihood
of an observed transcriptome being a doublet. The prior fraction
282 Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 4]

is often hard to estimate, however. Therefore, Scrublet uses a
threshold likelihood based on the observation that classiﬁer
scores are largely bimodal for doublets simulated from
empirical data. A low-scoring mode corresponds to doublets
indistinguishable from singlets, and thus such doublets are
‘‘embedded,’’ while a high-scoring mode corresponds to dou-
blets departing from singlet states and thus can be considered
neotypic. Referring to the STAR Methods for a detailed descrip-
tion of the algorithm, the outputs of the method are
(1) A predicted ‘‘detectable doublet fraction,’’f
D. This is the
predicted fraction of doublets that are neotypic.
(2) A ‘‘doublet score’’ for each observed transcriptome. This
score is used for doublet classiﬁcation, and it can also be
interpreted as a posterior likelihood of a cell being a
doublet when the fraction of doublets in the entire dataset
is known.
(3) A standard error on the doublet score. This error allows
establishing conﬁdence in the assignment of cells as
doublets.
(4) A binary label for each cell identifying neotypic doublets. If
the expected fraction of transcriptomes that correspond
to doublets in a dataset is br, then the fraction of all tran-
scriptomes classiﬁed as neotypic doublets should equal
br,f
D, while a remaining fraction br,ð1 /C0 fDÞ of the
observed transcriptomes will correspond to undetected
‘‘embedded’’ doublets.
Our implementation of the Scrublet classiﬁer ( github.com/
AllonKleinLab/scrublet) can incorporate arbitrary functions for
preprocessing and embedding of single-cell data. We also pro-
vide a standalone default set of functions to construct the cell
state manifold by applying principal-component analysis (PCA)
to the observed transcriptomes and simulated doublets. The im-
plementation avoids the need to cluster data or predeﬁne cell
state marker genes, and it is suitable for routine use, with classi-
ﬁcation of datasets of tens of thousands of cells requiring only a
few minutes ( Figure S1).
RESULTS
The results are organized into ﬁve sections. First, we test Scrub-
let on simulated datasets in order to assess its performance and
limitations under simpliﬁed conditions where there is perfect
knowledge of singlet and doublet identity. We then apply Scrub-
let to three experimental datasets, each of which provides some
form of independent ground truth for doublet identity. Finally, we
apply Scrublet to our own recently published hematopoiesis da-
taset, which presents a complex continuum of well-character-
ized cell states and where doublets can be identiﬁed through
prior knowledge.
Performance on Simulated Data
Using pedagogical tests on simulated data, our goal is to
demonstrate that (1) it is possible to use the proposed approach
as a classiﬁcation scheme; and (2) the detectable doublet frac-
tion, f
D, can be used to estimate the sensitivity of the classiﬁer,
i.e., the fraction of true doublets that one might be able to identify
using this approach alone.
Table 1. Experimental Methods for Multiplet Detection
Method name and references Approach Limitations
Species mixing
(Klein et al., 2015; Macosko
et al., 2015 )
Cells from different species (e.g., mouse and human)
are mixed and barcoded. Multiplets are detected as
cell barcodes associated with transcripts from both
species. Assuming 1:1 mixing, the identiﬁed multiplets
represent half of all multiplets, as the remaining half are
intra-species multiplets.
d Measures multiplet rate but does not facilitate
detection of multiplet cell states in typical
experimental samples from a single organism
Natural genetic variation
(Kang et al., 2018;
Xu et al., 2019 )
By mixing together cells from comparable samples
from multiple genotyped individuals, genetic variants in
transcripts can be used to assign each cell barcode to
one individual, or in the case of multiplets, to multiple
individuals. Only inter-individual multiplets can be
identiﬁed, so the fraction of detectable multiplets
increases with the number of individuals.
d Limited to samples with high genetic diversity
d Only possible if samples from different individ-
uals can be pooled and assayed simultaneously
Genetic labeling
(Adamson et al., 2016;
Datlinger et al., 2017;
Guo et al., 2019 )
Unique, expressed, genetic labels are introduced into
the cell sample prior to collection. Multiplets can then
be detected as cell barcodes with multiple distinct
genetic labels.
d Introduction of genetic labels is currently
possible only for cultured cells or limited in vivo
conditions
d Labeling may perturb the cells
Cell ‘‘hashing’’
(Gehring et al., 2018;
Stoeckius et al., 2018;
McGinnis et al., 2018 )
Cells are split into multiple wells, and each is labeled
with sample-speciﬁc oligonucleotide tags, using
antibodies or chemical approaches. Samples are then
pooled prior to scRNA-seq. Multiplets are identiﬁed as
cell barcodes associated with multiple oligo
sequences.
d Not well suited for very small or fragile samples
that cannot be split and recombined
Cell encapsulation at
multiple cell concentrations
After processing the same input sample at multiple cell
concentrations, multiplet-speciﬁc cell states can be
detected by ﬁnding cell states whose proportion
increases with the cell concentration.
d Requires at least two runs for each sample
d Requires sufﬁcient cells
Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019 283


[PDF_PAGE 5]

Using the Splatter package (Zappia et al., 2017), we simulated
single-cell data in the form of distinct cell clusters or as a contin-
uum of cell states (Figure 2A). Though these simulations may not
accurately recapitulate actual scRNA-seq data, they serve as an
initial demonstration of Scrublet’s strengths and limitations. Ap-
plications to real data in later sections more usefully test Scrub-
let’s performance. Varying the number and size of simulated cell
clusters, the doublet detector accurately identiﬁed up to 99% of
doublets that were generated between cells from different
clusters (neotypic doublets) with 99% precision, but only if clus-
ters were sufﬁciently well separated ( Figures 2 B and 2C). For
poorly separated groups of cells that did not form distinct clus-
ters, the recall dropped below 10%, as these doublets became
embedded among singlets. As expected, doublets formed by
cells from within the same cluster were virtually indistinguishable
from singlets using our method. However, Scrublet’s estimate
for the detectable doublet fraction ( f
D), i.e., the fraction of simu-
lated doublets above the doublet score threshold, accurately
predicted the recall, suggesting that fD serves as a useful tool
for measuring the impact of doublets in a given analysis ( Figures
2E and 2F).
The doublet detector also performed well when predicting
doublets in a continuum of cell states: in a simulation of two
paths diverging from the same starting state, up to 92% of dou-
blets formed by cells from divergent states (> 10% of the way
toward opposite endpoints) were identiﬁed at a precision of
98% ( Figure 2 D). As expected, doublets forming near the point
of divergence were poorly identiﬁed. In summary, these results
illustrate the basic concepts of the classiﬁer in idealized settings
with known inputs.
Performance on Dataset #1: Human-Mouse Cell Mixture
We tested the Scrublet on a publicly available dataset consisting
of a mixture of human (HEK293T) and mouse (NIH3T3) cells
(Figure 3A). This dataset, though not representative of most sin-
gle-cell experiments, provides a useful test case because the
A B
C
D
E F
Figure 2. Application of Scrublet to Simulated Data
(A) Schematic summary of simulations for testing Scrublet. d, inter-cluster variance; s, intra-cluster variance; n1, size of larger cluster; n2, size of smaller cluster; h,
inter-branch variance. See STAR Methods for full simulation details.
(B) Evaluation of doublet detector performance for varying numbers of clusters and cluster separation. After thresholding doublet scores based on t he simulated
doublet rate (5%), the recall (true positive rate) was measured using all doublets (left) or between-cluster doublets only (right). Points and error bars are the mean
and standard deviation of 10 independent simulations, respectively.
(C) Evaluation of doublet detector performance for two clusters with varying degrees of cluster size asymmetry. Panels and error bars as in (B).
(D) Evaluation of doublet detector performance for a branching continuum with varying degrees of separation between the two branch endpoints. Recal l was
measured for all doublets (left) and when limiting to doublets formed by cells from opposite branches (right). Error bars as in (B).
(E) Prediction of the detectable doublet fraction, f
D, using the distribution of scores for the synthetic doublets.
(F) Comparison of predicted fD to observed doublet recall for the simulations in (B).
284 Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 6]

differences between human and mouse genomic sequence pro-
vide an independent way to detect doublets ( Klein et al., 2015;
Macosko et al., 2015 ). We deﬁned a partial ground truth on
doublet identity according to whether a cell barcode associates
with transcripts from both species (a doublet) or just one species
(Figure 3B). Because doublets arising from the encapsulation of
two human or two mouse cells cannot be identiﬁed as such, we
expected our doublet detector to correctly predict all ground
truth labeled doublets, since they arise from distinct human
and mouse cell types and should thus be neotypic.
After hiding species labels and restricting to orthologous
genes ( Figure 3 C), Scrublet estimated the detectable doublet
fraction at f
D = 54%, close to the 50% expected for cross-spe-
cies doublets given equal input of mouse and human cells
(Figure 3 D). Furthermore, the detector accurately identiﬁed hu-
man-mouse doublets with a receiver-operator characteristic
(ROC) area under the curve (AUC) of 0.99 (recall of 98% of
human-mouse doublets with precision of 96%) ( Figures 3E, 3F,
and S2A), and the overall Scrublet-predicted doublet fraction
agreed well with the expected fraction ( Table 2). False positives
and negatives tended to lie in ‘‘boundary states.’’ Speciﬁcally,
false negatives (mixed-species doublets incorrectly called as
singlets by Scrublet) had lower degrees of species mixing than
true positives, while false positives had below-average total tran-
script counts and lay on the border between the doublet and
singlet clusters in PCA space ( Figure S2B). Compared to Scrub-
let, predicting doublets on the basis of total transcript counts
was less effective (AUC = 0.88), since the average human cell
contained nearly twice as many transcripts as the average
mouse cell; to achieve a recall of 90%, the precision dropped
to just 15% ( Figure 3F).
Performance on Dataset #2: Peripheral Blood Cells from
Multiple Individuals
To test the doublet detector in a more typical experimental
context, we evaluated its performance using a published dataset
PC 1
PC 2
mouse
human
Ground truth
mixed
(II) Embed data using gene orthologs
-20
30
20
10
0
-10
-30 100-10-20
Scrublet (AUC=0.99)
Total counts (AUC=0.88)
False positive rate
True positive rate
ROC curve
Human transcript counts
(I) Identify human-mouse doublets
mouse
human
mixed
Ground truth
0
4
3
2
1
5
6048 2
Mouse transcript counts
×104
×104
BA
C
ED
(I) Define ground truth
doublets (mixed species)
(II) Hide organism labels, 
keep only gene orthologs
Human + mouse cell mixture
(IV) Compare doublet 
predictions to ground truth
(III) Apply Scrublet, set
detectable doublet threshold
F
Doublet score of
observed cells
Single species
Mixed
Ground truth
(IV) Score distribution
for observed cells
Doublet score of
simulated doublets
Probability density
(III) Score distribution
for simulated doublets
D = 54% Predicted doublets (5.9%)
Figure 3. Doublet Prediction for a Mixture of Human and Mouse Cells
(A) Schematic overview of species mixing experiment.
(B) Identiﬁcation of mixed-species doublets based on fraction of reads mapping to human or mouse transcriptome.
(C) Principal-component (PC) analysis of single-cell transcriptomes, restricting to human-mouse gene orthologs.
(D) Histogram of doublet scores for simulated doublets. The bimodal distribution reﬂects the two types of doublets: undetectable intra-species emb edded
doublets (left peak) and inter-species neotypic doublets (right peak).
(E) Histograms of doublet scores for observed singlets (gray) and doublets (red). See also Figure S2.
(F) Receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve for Scrublet and total transcript counts as predictors of inter-species doublets. AUC, area unde r the curve.
Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019 285


[PDF_PAGE 7]

generated from a mixture of eight genotyped human donors’
mature blood cells (peripheral blood mononuclear cells, PBMCs)
(Kang et al., 2018). The authors identiﬁed ground truth multiplets
as cell barcodes associated with reads containing polymor-
phisms from more than one individual ( Figure 4 A). Given that
the data represent a similar number of cells from each individual,
roughly 7 out of 8 doublets should occur between individuals
and can be identiﬁed using this approach. Thus, in the ground
truth data, we expect at least 12.5% of true doublets to be
undetected.
To make use of this orthogonal method for multiplet detection,
we compared Scrublet predictions to the ground truth doublets
and also generated a ‘‘ground truth score’’ by calculating the
fraction of each cell’s neighbors that were mixed genotype dou-
blets (Figures 4B and 4C). Because this score reﬂects the density
of doublets in a region of gene expression space, it is directly
comparable to the score computed using Scrublet. We then
applied Scrublet to the transcriptomic data ( Figure 4 D) and
compared the Scrublet scores to these ground truth scores ( Fig-
ure 4E). This comparison showed a fair agreement: 89% of dou-
blets with a high ground truth score (> 0.4) were also identiﬁed by
Scrublet, with a precision of 77%. The high-scoring cells for both
methods co-localized in low-dimensional visualizations of the
data (Figures 4B, 4D, and S3A–S3C), with undetected doublets
scattered among other cell states. Re-processing the data
following removal of true or Scrublet-predicted doublets slightly
improved separation of cell types in the 2-D visualization but had
little effect on cell clustering, aside from the expected loss of
doublet-speciﬁc clusters ( Figures S3 D and S3E). Furthermore,
the recall of true doublets was accurately predicted by f
D, the
detectable doublet fraction as measured by the simulated
doublet distribution ( Figure 4 F). At the selected doublet score
threshold, the recall of 49% was in good agreement with the
f
D of 55%, and this held true across a range of thresholds.
This suggests that even though many doublets go undetected,
the fraction of identiﬁable doublets can be accurately estimated.
Though the precision was just 66%, this can be explained in part
by the imperfect nature of the ground truth labels, since doublets
formed by cells from the same individual are undetectable based
on genotype alone. Finally, the predicted overall doublet fraction
was only slightly higher than the experimentally estimated value
(Table 2).
As with the previous dataset, we compared the doublet detec-
tor performance to alternative strategies: (1) identifying cells co-
expressing curated marker genes of distinct cell types and (2)
identifying cells with high total transcript counts. For the former
method, we created a list of highly speciﬁc marker genes of
each cell type in this dataset and then calculated the amount
of co-expression of marker genes from different cell types ( Fig-
ure 4 G) to deﬁne a ‘‘marker co-expression score’’ ( STAR
Methods). Of the 773 true doublets correctly identiﬁed by Scrub-
let, 68% also had a high degree of marker gene co-expression.
Overall, the ‘‘marker co-expression score’’ did not perform as
well as Scrublet (AUC 0.77 versus 0.88) and required signiﬁcant
manual annotation.
For the method relying on high total transcript counts, we
found that true doublets did tend to have higher total transcript
counts than singlets (AUC = 0.81) ( Figures 4H and 4I). Because
total counts appeared to be informative and did not require
any manual annotation, we created a hybrid predictor by linear
combination of each cell’s Scrublet score with its locally normal-
ized total counts ( STAR Methods ). While this hybrid approach
performed better than any other for this particular example
(AUC = 0.93) (Figure 4I), its effectiveness could vary across data-
sets, and it required additional parameter ﬁtting to determine the
relative weights of the Scrublet score and total counts score.
Performance on Dataset #3: Peripheral Blood Cells at
Multiple Concentrations
In a third test, we turned to a dataset that offers a less direct in-
dependent strategy for detecting neotypic doublets: namely, a
single sample of PBMCs split and barcoded at two different
cell concentrations, yielding either 4,352 (‘‘PBMC-4k’’) or 8,391
(‘‘PBMC-8k’’) transcriptomes. We reasoned that multiplet-spe-
ciﬁc cell states should be identiﬁable as clusters whose relative
abundance increases with increasing input cell concentration
because, in fully dissociated samples, a doubling of cell concen-
tration doubles the probability of randomly encapsulating two
cells into the same droplet. In the PBMC data, states composed
uniquely of doublets should double in relative abundance, with
cell states that are predominantly singlets decreasing only incre-
mentally (Figure 5A).
As expected, the doublet detector identiﬁed roughly twice as
many doublets in the PBMC-8k sample (4.1%) as in PBMC-4k
(1.8%) ( Figures 5 B, 5C, and S4A–S4D), and as with the previ-
ous datasets, Scrublet’s estimate for the overall doublet
fraction was in close agreement with the expected value
(Table 2 ). Furthermore, when we compared the PBMC-8k cells
to their most similar PBMC-4k counterparts, the predicted
doublet states were present at a higher relative abundance,
Table 2. Scrublet-Predicted and Experimentally Expected Doublet Fractions
Dataset
Scrublet outputs Experimental rate
Detected
doublets (d)
Detectable doublet
fraction (fD)
Overall doublet
rate (d=fD)
Overall doublet
rate ( br) Rationale
Mouse-human (Figure 3) 5.9% 54% 10.9% 4 11.6% Using mouse versus
human genomes
Demuxlet (Figure 4) 8.1% 55% 14.6% 4 12.2% Using human SNPs
PBMCs (Figure 5B) 1.8% 53% 3.5% 4 3% Nominal doublet rate
PBMCs (Figure 5C) 4.1% 61% 6.8% 4 6% Nominal doublet rate
Bone marrow ( Figure 6) 3.6% 43% 8.3% 4 5%–10% inDrops observed droplet
occupancy
286 Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 8]

Doublet score of observed cells
Prob. density
Predicted doublets
(8.1%)
Doublet score of simulated doubletsProb. density
D = 55%
0 0.5 1
0
0.5
1
Total counts (TC)
Marker overlap (M)
Scrublet (S)
S + TC
S + Local TC
True doub. density
FPR
TPR
(iii) Apply threshold to
observed cells
0 0.5 1
Doublet
score
Singlet
Doublet
Prediction:
Scrublet score
Singlet
Doublet
Ground truth doublet density
0
0.2
0.4
Marker overlap score
0.8
0.6
2.85
3.75
3.15
3.45
log10(total counts)
Singlet Doublet
Ground truth:
Prob. density
log10(total counts)
D
00 . 51
Avg. density of true doublets
(fraction of neighbors)
A
Local
doublet
density
BKang et al., 2018
Define ground truth doublets
Predict doublets with Scrublet
Predict doublets with alternative methods
stnuoclatothgiHpalrevoenegrekraM
Genotype
scRNA-seq
Demultiplex
Identify ground 
truth doublets
(mixed genotypes)
Scrublet
8 individuals
Pool PBMCs
Compare
E
F
G H
(i) Apply Scrublet
(iv) Visualize predicted doublets
(ii) Threshold scores based on
simulated doublet distribution
I
Marker overlap score
Prob. density
Singlet
Doublet
Ground truth Method
TC (Panel H)
M (Panel G)
S (Panel D)
S + TC
S + Local TC
True doub.
density (Panel C)
AUC
0.81
0.77
0.88
0.91
0.93
0.87
Doublet score threshold
Precision [TP/(TP+FP]
Recall [TP/(TP+FN)]
Threshold from (D)
Predicted
recall, D
Observed
recall
Precision
C
Figure 4. Doublet Prediction for Blood Cells from Eight Genotyped Human Donors
(A) Schematic overview of genotyped cell mixing experiment.
(B) Force-directed graph layout of the proﬁled cells. Black points indicate ground truth doublets identiﬁed by Demuxlet as barcodes associated with poly-
morphisms from more than one individual ( Kang et al., 2018 ).
(C) Force-directed graph layout of ground truth doublet score, deﬁned as the fraction of a cell’s neighbors that are mixed genotyped doublets.
(D) Application of Scrublet to the transcriptomic data. After calculating doublet scores (i), the histogram of scores for simulated doublets was use d to determine a
threshold for detection of neotypic doublets (ii). Applying this threshold to observed cell barcodes (iii) yielded doublet predictions for each tra nscriptome (iv). f
D,
predicted detectable doublet rate. See also Figure S3.
(legend continued on next page)
Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019 287


[PDF_PAGE 9]

while singlet states changed little or decreased ( Figure 5D). This
test again suggests that the doublet detector correctly iden-
tiﬁes neotypic doublets.
We used this dataset to demonstrate that removal of doublets
can improve the quality of downstream analyses, such as iden-
tiﬁcation of genes expressed in a cell type-speciﬁc manner.
We identiﬁed cell type-speciﬁc marker genes in the PBMC-8k
dataset before and after excluding Scrublet-predicted doublets.
Doublet removal resulted in marked increases in the number of
highly speciﬁc genes detected for B cells, T cells, and mono-
cytes ( Figures S4 E and S4F) since many doublets also ex-
pressed these genes at relatively high levels.
Prediction of Doublets in a Cell State Continuum
The above examples demonstrate Scrublet’s ability to correctly
identify neotypic doublets from datasets consisting of distinct
cell types. In a ﬁnal example, we applied it to a continuum of
cell states by analyzing transcriptomes of KIT+ hematopoietic
progenitors from the mouse bone marrow ( Tusi et al., 2018)( Fig-
ure 6A). These cells form a continuum from multipotent progen-
(E) Comparison of Scrublet to the ground truth doublet score, colored by genotype-based doublet labels (singlets, gray; doublets, black).
(F) Comparison of detectable doublet fraction (solid black line) and actual recall (dashed black line) for a range of doublet score thresholds and the corresponding
precision (red line). TP, true positive; FN, false negative; FP, false positive.
(G) Alternative doublet prediction based on co-expression of marker genes of distinct cell types. Upper: force-directed graph layout with cells col ored by marker
overlap score. Lower: histograms of marker overlap score for ground truth singlets (gray) and doublets (red).
(H) Alternative doublet prediction based total transcript counts. Upper: force-directed graph layout with cells colored by total counts. Lower: hi stograms of total
counts for ground truth singlets (gray) and doublets (red).
(I) ROC curves (upper) and AUC scores (lower) for various doublet prediction methods. ‘‘S+TC’’ and ‘‘S+Local TC’’ are linear combinations of the Scrublet score
and total counts or the Scrublet score and total counts relative to neighboring cells, respectively (see STAR Methods for details).
AB C
D
Figure 5. Doublet Prediction Using Multiple
Concentrations of Blood Cells
(A) Schematic overview of how multiple concentra-
tions of the same cell sample can be used to identify
doublet-speciﬁc states.
(B) Scrublet score histogram (upper) and force-
directed graph layout (lower) for the low cell con-
centration (PBMC-4k) sample. See also Figure S4.
(C) Same as (B), but for the high cell concentration
(PBMC-8k) sample. See also Figure S4.
(D) Comparison of cluster sizes in PBMC-4k
and PBMC-8k samples to identify doublet-speciﬁc
clusters, which are expected to be disproportion-
ately larger in the PBMC-8k data. After clustering
the PBMC-4k cells (left), each PBMC-8k cell was
mapped to its most similar PBMC-4k cell, and the
proportions of cells from each sample in each
cluster were compared (center). This relative cluster
abundance was then compared to the Scrublet
predictions (right).
itors to unilineage committed cells. Several
groups of doublets were readily distin-
guishable ( Figures 6 B, 6C, and S5) and
formed ‘‘bridges’’ between different
committed progenitor types. Here, we
lack a ground truth for conﬁrming the iden-
tity of the doublets, but since such bridges
are inconsistent with our current under-
standing of hematopoiesis, it is likely that our doublet detector
is correct in identifying them.
We again compared Scrublet to other approaches based
on marker genes or total counts. As before, predicted doublets
consistently expressed combinations of marker genes for
distinct maturing progenitor states ( Figure 6D), while only some
predicted doublets had above average total transcript counts
(Figure 6E).
This dataset was also instructive in highlighting a shortcoming
of our approach when one of its assumptions is violated. Namely,
Scrublet can detect cell aggregate doublets only if both parent
cell types are observed as singlets elsewhere in the dataset.
Through manual curation, we identiﬁed a small group of tran-
scriptomes co-expressing markers of erythroblasts and mature
macrophages (Figure 6C). Macrophages and KIT+ erythroblasts
are known to physically associate in the bone marrow in erythro-
blastic islands ( Manwani and Bieker, 2008 ) and have been
observed in other scRNA-seq datasets ( Grun et al., 2016 ). Since
macrophages do not express the cell surface receptor KIT, used
for cell puriﬁcation in this experiment, they appear only in the
288 Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 10]

form of doublets in this dataset. Unfortunately, such aggregates
might confound other methods for doublet detection, including
all of the experimental methods in Table 1. They may, however,
be identiﬁable by combining multiple datasets in order to provide
the full set of singlet states for Scrublet.
DISCUSSION
We proposed and tested a classiﬁcation scheme for cell multi-
plets, focusing on cell doublets, as these are expected to form
the majority of multiplets in all but specialized cases. The classi-
ﬁer is trained using the data itself and reasonable assumptions
about the structure of gene expression space. The application
to simulated data and then to four empirical datasets demon-
strates that the approach can accurately identify doublets formed
by cells from distinct states, as assessed by formal estimates of
recall and precision where possible. The cell transcriptomes that
scored as doublets with the highest conﬁdence were also those
found after manual curation of the data to co-express marker
genes of distinct cell states. The classiﬁcation approach outper-
formed manual curation and simple total counts-based ap-
proaches, although it beneﬁtted from being combined with total
counts information. We demonstrated the practical beneﬁts of
doublet removal in removing artifactual states and in improving
the signal-to-noise in the expression of cell type-speciﬁc genes.
Although the method appears to perform well, its underlying
assumptions do impose some limitations. First, the method
assumes that multiplets are rare. This is required (1) to justify
the study of doublets rather than all multiplets and (2) for the
doublets simulated by the classiﬁer to overwhelmingly reﬂect
doublet states rather than higher-order states. Second, the
method strictly requires that every cell state contributing to a
doublet also be represented as a singlet state in the dataset. If
a particular singlet cell state is excluded experimentally, it trivially
cannot be detected as part of a multiplet state, because the
missing parent state does not contribute to the simulated
doublet pool used for doublet classiﬁcation. This limitation could
be appreciated in the ﬁnal dataset, from cells puriﬁed conditional
on expression of a cell surface protein, KIT. We found that cell
doublets resulting from incomplete dissociation of a KIT+
erythroid cell and a KIT /C0 macrophage could not be detected
by the classiﬁer because no singlet macrophage state was pre-
sent in the dataset. An extension of this limitation is that the
method could underperform if cell clumps with a stereotyped
composition occurred in a sample. Scrublet performs best for
doublets resulting from random co-encapsulation because the
frequency of such doublet states can be predicted by the fre-
quency of singlet states. Doublets from incomplete dissociation
can still be effectively detected provided that they are rare and
that the singlet states are well represented in the data.
A third limitation of the approach is its sensitivity to the struc-
ture of the single-cell state manifold. Scrublet performs best in
identifying doublets formed between distinct parent states.
This limitation is quantiﬁed for any given dataset by the calcu-
lated detectable doublet fraction, f
D, which is expected to be
high if singlet states are distributed among many discrete,
well-separated states; it is only 50% if cells form two discrete
and equal-sized clusters, and it can be lower than 50% for com-
plex continuum manifolds. Countering this shortcoming is the
notion that rare doublet states are only important to exclude if
they form novel features on a cell state manifold, which would
in turn make them detectable using the proposed approach.
E GN
M
Ba Meg
MPP
D
Ly
0
0.5
1
Doublet score
Number of cells
Doublet score
Predicted doublets
(3.6%)
A
Predicted singlet
Predicted doublet
Undetected macrophage-
erythroblast doublet
B
C
103
Total counts
104
log10(total counts)
Prob. density
Total counts
Marker overlap
0
1.6
0.8
Prob. density
Marker overlap
Pred. singlet
Pred. doublet
Marker gene overlap ED
Predict doublets with alternative methodsDoublet predictions
Predict doublets with ScrubletKIT+ bone marrow Figure 6. Prediction of Doublets in a Contin-
uum of Differentiating Hematopoietic Pro-
genitors
(A) Force-directed graph layout of KIT+ mouse
bone marrow cells proﬁled by scRNA-seq. Cells
are colored by expression of established marker
genes. E, erythroid; Ba, basophil/mast cell; Meg,
megakaryocyte; MPP, multipotent progenitor; Ly,
lymphoid; D, dendritic cell; M, monocyte; GN,
granulocytic neutrophil. Adapted from Tusi et al.,
2018.
(B) Force-directed graph layout colored by Scrublet
score (left) and histogram of Scrublet scores (right).
See also Figure S5.
(C) Predicted doublets localized on force-directed
graph layout. Gray, predicted singlets; black,
Scrublet-predicted doublets; red, likely erythro-
blast-macrophage doublets ( C1qa+ Hba-a1+), un-
detected by Scrublet due to absence of macro-
phage singlets in the KIT+ data.
(D) Alternative doublet prediction based on co-
expression of marker genes of distinct cell types.
Upper: force-directed graph layout with cells
colored by marker overlap score. Lower: histo-
grams of marker overlap score for Scrublet-pre-
dicted singlets (gray) and doublets (red).
(E) Alternative doublet prediction based on total
transcript counts. Upper: force-directed graph
layout with cells colored by total counts. Lower:
histograms of total counts score for Scrublet-pre-
dicted singlets (gray) and doublets (red).
Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019 289


[PDF_PAGE 11]

Therefore, the doublet detector provides a useful tool both for
estimating the potential impact of doublets on downstream hy-
pothesis generation through the magnitude of fD and for identi-
fying bona ﬁde doublet states for exclusion.
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d METHOD DETAILS
B The Scrublet Algorithm
B Deﬁnitions
B General Approach
B Detailed Method
B Scrublet Theory
B Testing Scrublet
d DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found with this article online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cels.2018.11.005.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NIH grants 1R01HL141402 and 5R33CA212697
and an Edward Mallinckrodt, Jr. Foundation grant. We thank James Briggs
for insightful discussion in conceptualizing the approach.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.L.W. conceived the approach. S.L.W., R.L., and A.M.K. formalized the prob-
lem. S.L.W. and R.L. developed and applied the methods. S.L.W. and A.M.K.
wrote the paper. A.M.K. supervised the work.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
A.M.K. is a co-founder of 1Cell-Bio.
Received: July 9, 2018
Revised: September 28, 2018
Accepted: November 28, 2018
Published: April 3, 2019
REFERENCES
Adamson, B., Norman, T.M., Jost, M., Cho, M.Y., Nunez, J.K., Chen, Y.,
Villalta, J.E., Gilbert, L.A., Horlbeck, M.A., Hein, M.Y., et al. (2016). A multi-
plexed single-cell CRISPR screening platform enables systematic dissection
of the unfolded protein response. Cell 167, 1867–1882.e21.
Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. B
(Methodol.) 57, 289–300.
Bernhardsson, E. (2013). Annoy: approximate nearest neighbors in C++/
Python optimized for memory usage and loading/saving to disk (2013).
Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., and Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast un-
folding of communities in large networks. J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp.
Cao, J., Packer, J.S., Ramani, V., Cusanovich, D.A., Huynh, C., Daza, R., Qiu,
X., Lee, C., Furlan, S.N., Steemers, F.J., et al. (2017). Comprehensive single-
cell transcriptional proﬁling of a multicellular organism. Science 357, 661–667.
Datlinger, P., Rendeiro, A.F., Schmidl, C., Krausgruber, T., Traxler, P.,
Klughammer, J., Schuster, L.C., Kuchler, A., Alpar, D., and Bock, C. (2017).
Pooled CRISPR screening with single-cell transcriptome readout. Nat.
Methods 14, 297–301.
Elias, J.E., and Gygi, S.P. (2010). Target-decoy search strategy for mass spec-
trometry-based proteomics. Methods Mol. Biol. 604, 55–71.
Gehring, J., Park, J.H., Chen, S., Thomson, M., and Pachter, L. (2018). Highly
multiplexed single-cell RNA-seq for deﬁning cell population and transcriptional
spaces. bioRxiv .
Gierahn, T.M., Wadsworth, M.H., 2nd, Hughes, T.K., Bryson, B.D., Butler, A.,
Satija, R., Fortune, S., Love, J.C., and Shalek, A.K. (2017). Seq-Well: portable,
low-cost RNA sequencing of single cells at high throughput. Nat. Methods 14,
395–398.
Grifﬁths, J.A., Scialdone, A., and Marioni, J.C. (2018). Using single-cell geno-
mics to understand developmental processes and cell fate decisions. Mol.
Syst. Biol. 14.
Grun, D., Muraro, M.J., Boisset, J.C., Wiebrands, K., Lyubimova, A.,
Dharmadhikari, G., van den Born, M., van Es, J., Jansen, E., Clevers, H.,
et al. (2016). De novo prediction of stem cell identity using single-cell transcrip-
tome data. Cell Stem Cell 19, 266–277.
Guo, C., Kong, W., Kamimoto, K., Rivera-Gonzalez, G.C., Yang, X., Kirita,
Y., and Morris, S.A. (2019). CellTag Indexing: genetic barcode-based sam-
ple multiplexing for single-cell genomics. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/
335547.
Han, X., Wang, R., Zhou, Y., Fei, L., Sun, H., Lai, S., Saadatpour, A., Zhou, Z.,
Chen, H., Ye, F., et al. (2018). Mapping the mouse cell atlas by microwell-seq.
Cell 172, 1091–1107.e17.
Jaitin, D.A., Kenigsberg, E., Keren-Shaul, H., Elefant, N., Paul, F., Zaretsky, I.,
Mildner, A., Cohen, N., Jung, S., Tanay, A., et al. (2014). Massively parallel sin-
gle-cell RNA-seq for marker-free decomposition of tissues into cell types.
Science 343, 776–779.
Kang, H.M., Subramaniam, M., Targ, S., Nguyen, M., Maliskova, L., McCarthy,
E., Wan, E., Wong, S., Byrnes, L., Lanata, C.M., et al. (2018). Multiplexed
droplet single-cell RNA-sequencing using natural genetic variation. Nat.
Biotechnol. 36, 89–94.
Klein, A.M., Mazutis, L., Akartuna, I., Tallapragada, N., Veres, A., Li, V.,
Peshkin, L., Weitz, D.A., and Kirschner, M.W. (2015). Droplet barcoding
for single-cell transcriptomics applied to embryonic stem cells. Cell 161,
1187–1201.
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M.,
Tirosh, I., Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly par-
allel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual cells using nanoliter drop-
lets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
Manwani, D., and Bieker, J.J. (2008). The erythroblastic island. Curr. Top. Dev.
Biol. 82, 23–53.
McGinnis, C.S., Murrow, L.M., and Gartner, Z.J. (2019). DoubletFinder:
Doublet Detection in Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Data Using Artiﬁcial
Nearest Neighbors. Cell Syst. 8. Published online April 3, 2018. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cels.2019.03.003.
McGinnis, C.S., Patterson, D.M., Winkler, J., Hein, M.Y., Srivastava, V.,
Conrad, D.N., Murrow, L.M., Weissman, J.S., Werb, Z., Chow, E.D., and
Gartner, Z.J. (2018). MULTI-seq: Scalable sample multiplexing for single-cell
RNA sequencing using lipid-tagged indices. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.
1101/387241.
McInnes, L., Healy, J., Saul, N., and Großberger, L. (2018). UMAP: uniform
manifold approximation and projection. J. Open Source Softw. 3.
Picelli, S., Bjorklund, A.K., Faridani, O.R., Sagasser, S., Winberg, G., and
Sandberg, R. (2013). Smart-seq2 for sensitive full-length transcriptome
proﬁling in single cells. Nat. Methods 10, 1096–1098.
Rosenberg, A.B., Roco, C.M., Muscat, R.A., Kuchina, A., Sample, P., Yao, Z.,
Graybuck, L.T., Peeler, D.J., Mukherjee, S., Chen, W., et al. (2018). Single-cell
proﬁling of the developing mouse brain and spinal cord with split-pool barcod-
ing. Science 360, 176–182.
290 Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 12]

Stoeckius, M., Zheng, S., Houck-Loomis, B., Hao, S., Yeung, B.Z., Mauck,
W.M., 3rd, Smibert, P., and Satija, R. (2018). Cell Hashing with barcoded anti-
bodies enables multiplexing and doublet detection for single cell genomics.
Genome Biol. 19, 224.
Tusi, B.K., Wolock, S.L., Weinreb, C., Hwang, Y., Hidalgo, D., Zilionis, R.,
Waisman, A., Huh, J.R., Klein, A.M., and Socolovsky, M. (2018). Population
snapshots predict early haematopoietic and erythroid hierarchies. Nature
555, 54–60.
van der Maaten, L. (2014). Accelerating t-SNE using tree-based algorithms.
J. Mach. Learn. Res. 15, 3221–3245.
Weinreb, C., Wolock, S., and Klein, A.M. (2018). SPRING: a kinetic interface for
visualizing high dimensional single-cell expression data. Bioinformatics 34,
1246–1248.
Xu, J., Falconer, C., and Coin, L. (2019). Genotype-free demultiplexing of
pooled single-cell RNA-seq. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/570614.
Zappia, L., Phipson, B., and Oshlack, A. (2017). Splatter: simulation of single-
cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol. 18, 174.
Zheng, G.X., Terry, J.M., Belgrader, P., Ryvkin, P., Bent, Z.W., Wilson, R.,
Ziraldo, S.B., Wheeler, T.D., McDermott, G.P., Zhu, J., et al. (2017).
Massively parallel digital transcriptional proﬁling of single cells. Nat.
Commun. 8, 14049.
Cell Systems 8, 281–291, April 24, 2019 291


[PDF_PAGE 13]

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Allon Klein (allon_klein@
hms.harvard.edu).
METHOD DETAILS
The Scrublet Algorithm
A formal basis for the doublet classiﬁer is provided in the ‘‘ Scrublet Theory’’ section, below.
Deﬁnitions
For clarity, we use the term ‘‘singlet’’ to refer to a transcriptome of a single cell and ‘‘doublet’’ to refer to a merged transcriptome of
two cells. The majority of observed transcriptomes are expected to be singlets.
General Approach
Starting with a raw counts matrix, X, where x
i,j is the number of detected transcripts of gene j in cell i,
1. Pre-ﬁlter cell barcodes to exclude background, typically barcodes with insufﬁcient total transcripts detected.
2. Simulate doublets by combining the counts from random pairs of cells: the counts for gene j in doublet i with parent cells a and
b is yi,j = xa,j + xb,j.
3. Build a k-nearest-neighbor (KNN) classiﬁer, labeling observed cells as 0 and simulated doublets as 1. In detail, construct a KNN
graph using the union of observed cells and simulated doublets and calculate the doublet score as the fraction of neighbors
that are simulated doublets.
4. Remove likely doublets by thresholding the doublet scores or by clustering observed cells and identifying clusters with uni-
formly high scores.
Detailed Method
Throughout this paper and in the code provided online at github.com/AllonKleinLab/scrublet, we implement the doublet detector
as described in the following sections. However, our online code also allows for arbitrary preprocessing, enabling users to apply
their preferred methods for gene ﬁltering, normalization, dimensionality reduction, etc., prior to running the core doublet detec-
tor code.
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
Software and Algorithms
Scrublet This paper https://github.com/AllonKleinLab/scrublet
Splatter v1.0.3 Zappia et al., 2017 https://github.com/Oshlack/splatter
t-SNE van der Maaten, 2014 http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/
generated/sklearn.manifold.TSNE.html
UMAP McInnes et al., 2018 https://github.com/lmcinnes/umap
Louvain clustering Blondel et al., 2008 https://github.com/taynaud/python-louvain
Other
Dataset: 12k 1:1 Mixture of Fresh Frozen Human
(HEK293T) and Mouse (NIH3T3) Cells
10X Genomics Single Cell Gene
Expression Datasets
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-
gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/hgmm_12k
Dataset: Demuxlet batch 2 control PBMCs Kang et al., 2018 GEO: GSM2560248
Dataset: 4k PBMCs from a Healthy Donor 10X Genomics Single Cell Gene
Expression Datasets
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-
gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/pbmc4k
Dataset: 8k PBMCs from a Healthy Donor 10X Genomics Single Cell Gene
Expression Datasets
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-
gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/pbmc8k
Dataset: Mouse Kit+ bone marrow, basal Tusi et al., 2018 GEO: GSM2388072
e1 Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 14]

Default Preprocessing
Starting with a background-ﬁltered, UMI-based counts matrix for the observed cells, we perform normalization, gene ﬁltering, and
principal components analysis (PCA):
1. Normalize each cell by its total counts, setting the post-normalization total to the average total of all cells. That is, the normal-
ized counts for gene j in cell i were calculated from the raw counts, xi,j,a s bxi;j = xi;j X=Xi , where Xi = P
j xi;j and X is the average Xi
over all cells.
2. Identify highly variable genes, keeping genes with Rng counts in Rnc cells and in the top qth percentile of most variable genes,
as measured by V-score (baseline-corrected Fano factor) ( Klein et al., 2015 ). Default values are ng =3 , nc = 3, and q = 85 (i.e.,
the 15% most variable genes).
3. Using the genes identiﬁed in step 2, Z-score standardize the data such that each gene has mean of zero and standard deviation
of unity. Store the means and standard deviations for downstream scaling of the counts for simulated doublets (below).
4. Run PCA (unweighted). Store the eigenvectors (gene loadings) for transformation of simulated doublets (below).
Note that for three of the datasets (‘‘human-mouse’’, ‘‘Demuxlet PBMCs’’, and ‘‘PBMCs at multiple concentrations’’), we used a
variant of steps 3 and 4 that maintains the sparse nature of the data and reduces computational costs, as this will likely be important
for dealing with increasingly large single-cell datasets. Namely, in step 3 the data were standardized but not mean-centered, and for
step 4 truncated singular value decomposition (SVD) was used in place of PCA. These alternative options are available in the pre-
processing pipeline implemented in our online code.
Doublet Simulation
Doublets are simulated by adding the unnormalized counts from randomly sampled observed transcriptomes. Doublet transcrip-
tomes are then transformed into the same PCA space as the observed transcriptomes through the following steps:
1. Normalize gene expression for each simulated doublet (same as step 1 of ‘‘Preprocessing’’, above).
2. Apply the gene ﬁlter from step 2 of ‘‘Preprocessing’’.
3. Standardize the simulated data using the same gene means and standard deviations as measured in the observed transcrip-
tomes (step 3 of ‘‘Preprocessing’’), i.e., rather than re-calculating the mean and standard deviation for each gene based on the
simulated data, simply subtract the gene’s observed mean and divide by its observed standard deviation.
4. Apply the eigenvectors from step 4 of ‘‘Preprocessing’’ to embed simulated doublets in the same PCA space as the observed
transcriptomes.
KNN Classiﬁer
For the default preprocessing, a KNN graph is built using Euclidean distance in the combined PCA embedding of the observed and
simulated cells. Scrublet further allows for constructing a KNN graph in a user-deﬁned embedding, in place of PCA. To set the num-
ber of neighbors, Scrublet accepts a parameter k for the average number of observed transcriptome neighbors, and a parameter r for
the ratio of the number of simulated doublets to observed transcriptomes. The adjusted number of graph neighbors, k
adj =
round(k,(1+r)), is used to construct the graph. We have found that setting k = roundð0:5,
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
number of cells
p
Þ and rR2 works well.
For large datasets, an approximate nearest neighbor algorithm is used for graph construction, as this dramatically improves speed
with little cost in accuracy ( Bernhardsson, 2013).
Next, { L(xi)} and { L(yi)}, the doublet scores for the observed transcriptomes { xi} and simulated doublets { yi}, respectively, are
calculated by ﬁnding the fraction of each transcriptome’s neighbors that are simulated doublets and calculating the Bayesian Likeli-
hood derived in the ‘‘Scrublet Theory’’ section, below. For transcriptomei with kd(i) simulated doublet neighbors, the doublet score is
Li = qi br=r
1 /C0 br /C0 qi ð1 /C0 br /C0 br=rÞ
where
qi = kd ðiÞ + 1
kadj + 2
and br is the estimated doublet rate (i.e., fraction of observed transcriptomes that are doublets), which is provided as input to the
Scrublet classiﬁer.
A standard error is also calculated for Li (see ‘‘Scrublet Theory’’, below):
SEðLi Þ = qi br=r
ð1 /C0 br /C0 qi ð1 /C0 br /C0 br=rÞÞ2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ/C18SEðqi Þ
qi
ð1 /C0 brÞ
/C19 2
+
/C18SEðbrÞ
br ð1 /C0 qi Þ
/C19 2
s
where
SEðqi Þ =
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
qi ð1 /C0 qi Þ
kadj + 3
s
Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019 e2


[PDF_PAGE 15]

and SEðbrÞ is the uncertainty in the estimated overall doublet rate, which additionally is provided as input to the Scrublet
classiﬁer.
Setting the Doublet Score Threshold
After computing the doublet scores { L(xi)} and { L(yi)}, a threshold q is set based on the distribution of { L(yi)}, and observed tran-
scriptomes with {L(xi)}>q are predicted as doublets. In all of the presented examples, the distribution of { L(yi)} was bimodal, reﬂect-
ing the partitioning of doublets into embedded and neotypic types. The threshold was set by eye to lie between the two peaks of the
histogram of {L(yi)}. We also provide a method for automatic threshold detection using the skimage.ﬁlters.threshold_minimum func-
tion from the Python package scikit-image, though we still recommend visual inspection of the histogram of { L(yi)} to conﬁrm the
threshold has been set in a reasonable location.
After setting a threshold, a measure of conﬁdence in the doublet predictions is provided by a z-score,
Zi = Li /C0 q
SEðLi Þ
Recommended Self-Consistency Tests
While the Scrublet package may be used as-is, we recommend two self-consistency tests:
1. Conﬁrm that the distribution of likelihoods of simulated doublets, { L(yi)}, is bimodal.
2. We expect the fraction of observed transcriptomes predicted to be doublets, d, to roughly equal dzbr,fD.
If the ﬁrst condition is not satisﬁed, the choice ofbr may be incorrect; if the second condition is not satisﬁed, then the choice ofq may
be incorrect. Alternatively, the assumptions required for the classiﬁer may be violated.
Scrublet Theory
In this section we offer a formal deﬁnition for ‘‘embedded’’ and ‘‘neotypic’’ multiplets, provide a derivation of the doublet Likelihood,
motivate the method for Likelihood threshold choice for the Scrublet classiﬁer, and deﬁne the ‘‘detectable doublet fraction’’. Equa-
tions 7 , 8, and 10 derived below deﬁne key outputs of the Scrublet classiﬁer and are referred to in the ‘‘ Scrublet algorithm ’’ sec-
tion, above.
Deﬁning Neotypic and Embedded Multiplets
Probability Distributions of Sampled Transcriptomes . Consider a set of observed transcriptomes, fu
i g˛RN, with ui =( ui1,.,uiN) being
a vector of the expression values of N genes for the i-th transcriptome. Two probability density functions PS : RN1R and PD : RN1R
respectively describe the distribution of singlets and doublets from which { ui} are sampled. Some observed transcriptomes ui corre-
spond to singlet cells sampled from ~PSðuÞ, and others correspond to doublets sampled from ~PDðuÞ.I f r is the fraction of sampled
transcriptomes that are doublets, then the observed transcriptomes are sampled from the probability density function ~Pobs:ðuÞ =
r ~PDðuÞ + ð1 /C0 rÞ ~PSðuÞ.
The processing of single-cell data involves one or more steps of normalization, gene selection and/or embedding that collectively
deﬁne a map f : RN1U from the original gene expression space to a new space U that is RM (M<N), or in the case of additional
discrete cluster assignment, U is Z3RM (possibly with M = 0 if only discrete clustering is performed). In what follows, the results
hold for any choice of map f. We deﬁne f to generally encompass methods for single-cell data analysis including, for example, total
count normalization, selection of a subset of genes for downstream analysis, principal component analysis, methods for non-linear
embedding, a possible adoption of a cosine distance, assignment of cells to discrete clusters, and so on. Under the action of this
map, the sampled transcriptomes are x
i = f(ui), and one generates probability densities of singlets and doublets in the mapped
spaces, PS(x) and PD(x), and the observed transcriptomes are distributed as,
Pobs:ðxÞ = rPDðxÞ + ð1 /C0 rÞPSðxÞ: (Equation 1)
We denote these distributions without the ‘‘/C24 ’’ sign to distinguish them from the original probability densities in RN.
Neotypic versus Embedded Doublets . A doublet with transcriptome u, mapped to x = f(u)˛U, can be considered ‘‘embedded’’
among singlets if rPDðxÞ/C28ð 1 /C0 rÞPSðxÞ, i.e., if it occupies a region of U that is overwhelmingly occupied by singlets. Conversely,
a doublet can be considered ‘‘neotypic’’ ifrPDðxÞ[ð1 /C0 rÞPSðxÞ, i.e., if it occupies a region of U that is overwhelmingly occupied
by sampled doublets. Finally, if rPDðxÞ/C24ð 1 /C0 rÞPSðxÞ, then a doublet occupies a region occupied by comparable numbers of singlets
and doublets, and it is neither neotypic nor embedded in the qualitative sense proposed in this paper. In such cases, the doublets do
not generate qualitatively new cell states, but they signiﬁcantly perturb existing cell states and may be considered to be ‘‘perturba-
tive’’ doublets. In summary:
r
1 /C0 r
PDðxÞ
PSðxÞ
/C12/C12/C12
/C12
x˛fxi g
8
<
:
[1 Neotypic
/C24 1 Perturbative
/C28 1 Embedded
Thus, ‘‘neotypic’’ and ‘‘embedded’’ doublets can be considered as limiting cases. When doublets are rare
(r /C28 1), we propose that most doublets occupy regions of U that are embedded or neotypic. For this reason, the classiﬁcation is a
useful one. One can however imagine specialized cases where many doublets are perturbative (as per the above classiﬁcation), for
example if r is not small.
e3 Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 16]

The Operational Nature of Doublet Errors . Because the map f is not isomorphic (e.g., since M<N), it will not preserve the ratios of
singlet and doublet distributions, i.e., in general ~PDðuÞ= ~PSðuÞsPDðfðuÞÞ=PSðfðuÞÞ. This means that a multiplet state u could appear
embedded in one map U1, but neotypic in another map U2. This is easy to appreciate: for example, if analysis is restricted to one
subset of genes, then some doublets may be neotypic, while restriction to another subset of genes might cause the same doublets
to be embedded.
The operational dependence of doublet classiﬁcation on the choice of map f means that the nature of doublet errors cannot be
considered to be immutable properties of the doublets. A doublet error analysis may need to be carried out for each choice of
data analysis. In the ‘‘Detectable doublet fraction’’ section, below, we revisit this ambiguity when considering the theoretical detect-
able doublet fraction.
The Doublet Likelihood
In the following we derive the Likelihood L(x) that a mapped transcriptome x = f(u)˛U is a doublet, in the limiting case where doublets
are rare ( r /C28 1). The doublet Likelihood serves as a basis for classiﬁcation.
As will become clear, L(x) is sensitive to our prior belief in the doublet rate r. It will be useful to distinguish between the true doublet
rate, r, and our prior belief in its value, which we denotebr. Because br can be inaccurate, we do not classify doublets directly based on
an invariant threshold L(x)>q=1/2, but instead estimate a threshold value q in a manner that is not sensitive to br. For clarity, the table
below summarizes the symbols introduced in this derivation.
Summary of symbols
Relationships between probability densities. To develop a doublet classiﬁer for a pointx˛U, the Bayesian approach is to assign x as
a doublet if brP
DðxÞ>ð1 /C0 brÞPSðxÞ, or a singlet otherwise. Though PS and PD are not known, they can be approximated. From Equa-
tion 1, in the limit r /C28 1 the probability density of observed transcriptomes approximates that of singlets:
PobsðxÞ = PSðxÞ + O ðrÞ:
The approximation of the doublet distribution is similar: if sampled uniformly, then true doublets are a convolution of singlets, i.e.,
~PDðuÞ = ~PS /C3 ~PSðuÞ, while simulated doublets, with probability density P0U, are generated by combining transcriptomes sampled from
~PobsðuÞ, i.e., a convolution of observed transcriptomes ~P0DðuÞ = ~Pobs /C3 ~PobsðuÞ. Therefore, P0DðxÞ is approximately the doublet prob-
ability density, with an error of order r:
P0
D = ð1 /C0 rÞ2PS /C3 PS + 2rð1 /C0 rÞPD /C3 PS + r2PD /C3 PD
= PD + O ðrÞ
The Approximate Doublet Likelihood . From Bayes’ theorem,
LðxÞ = PDðxÞbr
PDðxÞbr + PSðxÞð1 /C0 brÞ
u Measured cell transcriptome ( ˛RN)
U Embedding space to which u is mapped
x˛U Cell transcriptome after dimensionality reduction
PS(x) Probability density of singlets (in U)
PD(x) Probability density of true doublets (in U)
P0DðxÞ Probability density of simulated doublets (in U)
Pobs(x) Probability density of observed transcriptomes (in U)
r Fraction of observed transcriptomes that are doublets
br Prior belief in the value of r
Mobs Total number observed transcriptomes
MD Total number simulated doublets
rM D/Mobs
k Number of nearest neighbors for KNN classiﬁcation
kd Number of nearest neighbors to x that are simulated doublets
kobs Number of nearest neighbors to x that are observed transcriptomes
q(x) The binomial proportion of nearest neighbors that are simulated doublets
L(x) The Likelihood that a transcriptome x is a doublet
h,i Expectation value of an estimator
SE[,] The standard error of the estimator
Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019 e4


[PDF_PAGE 17]

From Equation 1 and the above approximations, we can rewrite L(x) in terms of measured distributions, discarding terms of higher
order in r and br:
LðxÞ = ðP0
D + O ðrÞÞbr
ðP0
D + O ðrÞÞðr /C0 brÞ + Pobsð1 /C0 br /C0 rÞ + .
= P0
DðxÞ
PobsðxÞ br + O
/C0
r2; rbr; br2/C1
z P0
DðxÞbr
P0
DðxÞbr + PobsðxÞð1 /C0 brÞ:
(Equation 2)
In the last line, to avoid having a Likelihood greater than one, we introduced a small correction of order Oðbr2Þ. This form is a perfect
Bayesian Likelihood under the approximation that P0D = PD and Pobs=PS.
Theoretical Binomial Proportion . We construct a nearest-neighbor classiﬁer with a total number of MD simulated doublets, and a
total number of Mobs observed transcriptomes. Let r = MD/Mobs. The theoretical probability of randomly sampling a simulated doublet
in the neighborhood of x is then
qðxÞ = P0DðxÞr
P0DðxÞr + Pobs
: (Equation 3)
It can be seen from Equations 1 and 2 that L(x) is a monotonic function of q:
LðxÞ = qðxÞbr=r
ð1 /C0 brÞ/C0 qðxÞð1 /C0 br /C0 br=rÞ : (Equation 4)
Estimator of the Binomial Proportion. For any single transcriptome, we can estimate the binomial proportionq(x) from the KNN clas-
siﬁer output, which reports on the number kd of simulated doublets that are found to be nearest neighbors of x out of the k nearest
neighbors. For brevity, we denote q(x)a s q. With a uniform prior on q˛[0,1], the posterior distribution of q follows a Beta distribution
with expectation value,
hqi = kd + 1
k + 2 (Equation 5)
and standard error,
SE½q/C138 =
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
hqið1 /C0 hqiÞ
k + 3
r
: (Equation 6)
Estimator of the Doublet Likelihood . From Equations 4 , 5, and 6, one can calculate the Likelihood of a sampled transcriptome
x being a doublet. It is additionally useful to obtain a measure of conﬁdence in our estimator of L(x). Assuming small errors in q,
the estimator of the doublet Likelihood and its standard error are
/C28
LðxÞ
/C29
z hqibr=r
1 /C0 br /C0 hqið1 /C0 br /C0 br=rÞ (Equation 7)
and,
SE½LðxÞ/C138 z hqibr=r
ð1 /C0 br /C0 hqið1 /C0 br /C0 br=rÞÞ2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ/C18SE½q/C138
hqi ð1 /C0 brÞ
/C19 2
+
/C18SE½br/C138
br ð1 /C0 hqiÞ
/C19 2
s
: (Equation 8)
These two expressions are central results calculated by the Scrublet pipeline, as described in the ‘‘ Scrublet algorithm ’’ section,
above. The quantity SE½br/C138 , introduced here, provides a measure of uncertainty in the doublet rate br. To obtain the last expression,
we write down the error propagation formula,
SE½LðxÞ/C138 2 =
/C18
SE½q/C138 dL
dq jq = hqi
/C19 2
+
/C18
SE½br/C138 dL
dbr
/C19 2
(Equation 9)
and then calculate the relevant derivatives from Equation 4,
dL
dq jq = hqi = ð1 /C0 brÞbr=r
ð1 /C0 br /C0 hqið1 /C0 brð1 + 1=rÞÞÞ2
and
dL
dbr = ð1 /C0 hqiÞhqi=r
ð1 /C0 br /C0 hqið1 /C0 brð1 + 1=rÞÞÞ2:
These expressions together give Equation 8.
e5 Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 18]

Thresholding the Doublet Likelihood
In principle, the doublet likelihood L(x) alone could be used to decide on which cells are putative doublets: if hLðxÞi>0:5, call a cell a
doublet. The conﬁdence in the call is simply the value of L(x) itself.
However, the doublet likelihood L(x) is sensitive to the prior guess, br, on the fraction of observed transcriptomes that are doublets.
In practice br is known roughly, but it is easy to be off by several-fold from its true value r. Though uncertainty in br is already used to
estimate the error in L(x)i n Equation 8, we should ideally look for a method of doublet classiﬁcation that is not sensitive to br.
To do this, we treat L(x) as a feature on which to perform classiﬁcation, rather than as a strict posterior Bayesian probability. From
Equation 4 one can see that the value of br is then a parameter that monotonically rescales L(x), i.e., preserving the ordering of
all cells.
Practically, if hLðxÞi is larger than a threshold value q, we call it a doublet. The conﬁdence in the call is reﬂected by a z-score,
zðxÞ = ðhLðxÞi /C0 qÞ=SE½LðxÞ/C138 (Equation 10)
calculated from Equations 7 and 8. z(x) is provided as an output of the Scrublet pipeline for each transcriptome.
To set the threshold value q, we rely on our initial guess that doublets are overwhelmingly neotypic or embedded, with few perturb-
ing doublets (see ‘‘Deﬁning neotypic and embedded multiplets ’’, above). Deﬁningfyi = fðui Þg˛U as embedded transcriptomes of
simulated doublets only, we should expect values of { L(y)} to be bimodally distributed. We can then set the threshold q by looking
for a minimum between two modes (high and low) in the distribution of doublet Likelihoods fhLðyÞig. The Scrublet pipeline offers an
automated procedure for thresholding. Practically, however, it is advised for self-consistency to inspect the distribution of fhLðyÞig
to conﬁrm that it is indeed bimodal.
The success of this approach in rendering the Scrublet result insensitive to the value of the input parameter br is demonstrated in
Figure S3F, which plots the detectable doublet fraction fD (see next section) for different guesses for br, and in Figure S3G, which
shows how the ﬁnal doublet calls change with the value of br. Changing br also does not affect the AUC, because the rank ordering
of doublet scores is independent of br.
The Detectable Doublet Fraction
Ideally, one would wish to deﬁne a theoretical detectable doublet fraction, f
ðTh:Þ
D as the fraction of doublets that could be distinguished
from singlets using any method only has access to empirical transcriptomic data, e.g., by ﬁnding the optimal map f(u) that maximally
separately doublets from singlets.
We do not know how to estimate fðTh:Þ
D , or even whether it is knowable. Instead, we deﬁne an operational detectable doublet frac-
tion, fD, for a given choice of dimensionality reduction map f and a chosen threshold, q,a s
fD =
Z
P0
DðxÞHðhLðxÞi /C0 qÞdU;
where H(x) is the indicator function ( H(x) = 1 for xR0, 1 otherwise). The value of fD can be calculated as the fraction of simulated
doublets correctly detected by the classiﬁer.
Note that fD is not equivalent to the fraction of observed transcriptomes determined to be doublets,
d =
Z
PobsðxÞHðhLðxÞi /C0 qÞdU :
We observe that if br is correctly estimated, then fDzd=br, i.e., the fraction of all doublets that are detected in the data set should
approximately equal the operationally deﬁned fraction fD.
Testing Scrublet
Splatter Simulations
We used the Splatter R package (v1.0.3) ( Zappia et al., 2017) to simulate ground truth data for testing the doublet detector. For each
set of parameters, we simulated 10 replicates with 5000 cells and 2000 genes, using default parameters except where noted below.
Doublets were simulated at a rate of 5% by randomly sampling (without replacement) pairs of cells and summing their counts; cells
used to generate doublets were then removed from the data. The table below summarizes the conditions simulated for Figure 2.
Splatter simulation parameters
Prior to predicting doublets, PCA was run using genes with at least 3 counts in at least 3 cells. For Figures 2B and 2C, we used all
PCs with eigenvalues that were at least 20% of the maximum eigenvalue. For Figure 2D, the top 4 PCs were used for all conditions.
The doublet detector was run using k = 40, r = 5, and br = 0:05.
Panel Number of groups Group1 size /Group2 size
Splatter parameter
‘‘method’’
Splatter parameter
‘‘mean.shape’’ Splatter parameter ‘‘de.prob’’
B 2, 3, 5, 10, 15 n/a (all uniform) groups 0.5 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.1
C 2 1, 1.5, 2.3, 4, 9, 19 groups 0.5 0.05
D 2 1 Path 0.5 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.25, 0.4
Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019 e6


[PDF_PAGE 19]

To determine the overall recall ( TP
TP + FN; TP, true positives; FN, false negatives), we set a doublet score threshold based on the simu-
lated doublet rate of 5%; that is, cells with doublet scores in 95 th percentile or above were labeled as predicted doublets. Thus, the
precision ( TP
TP + FP; FP, false positives) is equal to the recall. The same procedure was used to measure the recall for between-cluster
doublets, restricting to doublets formed by cells from different groups. For the branching continuum simulation, between-branch
doublets were deﬁned as doublets formed by cells on opposite branches and with Splatter pseudotime >10%.
Human-Mouse Dataset
Pre-processing and Doublet Detector Parameters . Separate pre-ﬁltered counts matrices for human and mouse genes were down-
loaded from 10X Genomics (support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/hgmm_12k), along with species
assignments for each barcode (6,164 human cells, 5,915 mouse cells, and 741 mixed human/mouse multiplets). To create a single
counts matrix blind to the species of origin, each cell’s UMI counts for genes with identical mouse and human names ( n = 15,642
genes) were added together, and all other genes were excluded. For truncated SVD, we used the top 20% most highly variable genes
with R3 counts in R5 cells (n=2,372 genes) and kept the ﬁrst two PCs. Scrublet was run using k = 50, r = 10, and br = 0:12 (twice the
observed rate of human-mouse doublets). To classify cells as singlets or doublets, a threshold was set by eye using the histogram of
doublet scores for simulated doublets ( Figure 3D).
Demuxlet PBMC Dataset
Pre-processing and Doublet Detector Parameters . A ﬁltered counts matrix (14,619 cells and 35,635 genes) was downloaded from
GEO (GEO: GSM2560248), and demuxlet singlet/doublet calls were obtained from the paper’s GitHub page ( github.com/
yelabucsf/demuxlet_paper_code). For truncated SVD, we used the top 25% most highly variable genes with R2 counts in R3 cells
(n=3,197 genes) and kept the ﬁrst 25 PCs. Scrublet was run using k = 50, r = 5, and br = 0:12 (the observed doublet rate). To classify
cells as singlets or doublets, a threshold was set by eye using the histogram of doublet scores for simulated doublets ( Figure 4D).
Ground Truth Doublet Score. The ground truth doublet score was created by building a KNN graph (k = 35) using the observed cells
and calculating the fraction of each cell’s neighbors labeled as doublets by demuxlet.
2-D Visualization . Transcriptomes were visualized using a force-dir ected layout of the four-nea rest-neighbor graph of
observed cells, where neighbors were identiﬁed using Euclidean distance in PC space. Alternative visualizations were gener-
ated from the PCA coordinates using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) ( van der Maaten, 2014 )w i t hp e r p l e x -
ity=30 and angle=0.5 and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) ( McInnes et al., 2018 ) using 10 nearest
neighbors.
Marker Gene Co-Expression Score. The marker gene co-expression score was created by identifying highly speciﬁc marker genes
for each cell type, smoothing expression of these genes over the four-nearest-neighbor graph (see ‘‘Graph-based smoothing’’,
below), and summing the products of pairs of non-overlapping marker genes. In detail, we combined the following pairs of marker
genes:
T-cell and NK cell: CD27 x SH2D1B, CD27 x IGFBP7, CD27 x KLRF1
T-cell and B-cell: CD27 x BANK1, CD2 7 x
BLK, CD27 x MS4A1
T-cell and monocyte: CD27 x CST3
B-cell and NK cell: BANK1 x SH2D1B
Letting x/C3
i;j be the smoothed, normalized gene expression of gene j in cell i, the composite score for a pair of genes a and b is
si;a;b = x/C3
i;ax/C3
i;b
max
/C0
x/C3
a
/C1
max
/C0
x/C3
b
/C1 :
For a given cell type pair p with gene pairs 1,2, .,n, the marker gene overlap score for cell i is deﬁned as
Mi;p = 1
n
Xn
k = 1
si;ak ;bk
max
/C0
sak ;bk
/C1 :
And the composite marker gene overlap score for all cell type combinations (as shown in Figure 4G) is P
pMi;p.
Hybrid Doublet Score (Scrublet + total counts). For this dataset, we also tested whether combining total counts information with the
Scrublet score would improve doublet classiﬁcation, e.g., by enabling detection of embedded doublets ( Figure 4I). In both versions
described below, the parameters (relative weights of Scrublet and total counts-based scores) were ﬁt to maximize the AUC.
1. We tested a simple linear combination of Scrublet ( Li) and total counts ( Ti): 4Li + log10(Ti).
2. We created a ‘‘local total counts’’ (Ci) score, deﬁned as a cell’s total counts divided by the average total counts of its simulated
doublet neighbors, and combined it with Scrublet: 3 Li + Ci.
PBMCs at Multiple Concentrations
Pre-processing and Doublet Detector Parameters . Filtered counts matrices were downloaded from 10X Genomics (PBMC-4k:
support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/pbmc4k; PBMC-8k: support.10xgenomics.com/single-
cell-gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/pbmc8k). For truncated SVD, we used the top 15% most highly variable genes with R3 counts
in R3 cells (PBMC-4k, n=1,129 genes; PBMC-8k, n=1,307 genes) and kept the ﬁrst 30 PCs. Scrublet was run using k = 50, r = 5, and
e7 Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019


[PDF_PAGE 20]

br = 0:03 (PBMC-4k) or br = 0:06 (PBMC-8k), based on the expected doublet rates ( support.10xgenomics.com/permalink/
3vzDu3zQjY0o2AqkkkI4CC). To classify cells as singlets or doublets, a threshold was set by eye using the histogram of doublet
scores for simulated doublets.
2-D Visualization . Transcriptomes were visualized using a force-directed layout of the four-nearest-neighbor graph of observed
cells, where neighbors were identiﬁed using Euclidean distance in PC space. Alternative visualizations were generated from the
PCA coordinates t-SNE with perplexity=30 and angle=0.5 and UMAP using 10 nearest neighbors.
Mapping PBMC-8k to PBMC-4k. To map the PBMC-8k data to the PBMC-4k data, we TPM-normalized both datasets, ran PCA on
the PBMC-4k cells, and used the same eigenvectors to transform the PBMC-8k data. The PBMC-4k cells were clustered using spec-
tral clustering of the four-nearest-neighbor graph with 30 clusters. We then mapped each PBMC-8k cell to its nearest PBMC-4k cell
(Euclidean distance) and calculated the number of PBMC-8k cells mapping to each PBMC-4k cluster. In Figure 5D, we present the
relative number of PBMC-8k cells per cluster; that is, if n
j is the number of PBMC-8k cells mapping to cluster j and N4k and N8k are the
total number of PBMC-4k and PBMC-8k cells, then the relative mapping frequency for cluster j is log2
/C18
nj
N4k
N8k
/C19
.
Identifying Marker Genes . The PBMC-8k dataset was used as an example to show that removing doublets can improve
detection of cell type-speciﬁc marker genes ( Figures S4 E and S4F). Our goal was to identify highly speciﬁc marker genes at
the level of major cell types, so we ﬁrst used Louvain clustering ( Blondel et al., 2008 ) to make an initial set of clusters and
then merged clusters manually to give one clus ter per cell type (B-cells, T-cells, natur al killer cells, monocyt es, dendritic cells,
and two doublet-speciﬁc clusters). For each cluster, we tested genes expressed in >5% of cells in the cluster. For a gene to be
considered a marker, there were two requirements. First, it had to be signiﬁcantly differentially expressed between cells within
the cluster and cells outside the cluster, using a Wilcoxon rank-sum test (scipy.stats.ranksums) with a p-value<0.05 after
Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing ( Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995 ). Second, the average expres-
sion (1+transcripts per million, TPM) within the cluster had to be two-fold higher than in the cluster with the next-highest average
expression (i.e., [1+TPM
within cluster ]/[ 1 + T P M2nd-max cluster ] > 2). This test was run before and after removal of Scrublet-predicted
doublets.
Hematopoietic Progenitor Dataset
Pre-processing and Doublet Detector Parameters. The raw counts matrix was downloaded from GEO (GEO: GSM2388072). Restrict-
ing to cells from library batches 2, 3, and 4, we also excluded cells with fewer than 700 total counts or with >15% mitochondrial gene
counts (n=4,273 cells ﬁnal). For PCA, we ﬁltered genes using the same method as the original paper (Tusi et al., 2018), keeping genes
with mean expression >0.05 counts and a coefﬁcient of variation >2 ( n=7,255 genes), and kept the ﬁrst 40 PCs. Scrublet was run
using k = 50, r = 5, and br = 0.1. To classify cells as singlets or doublets, a threshold was set by eye using the histogram of doublet
scores for simulated doublets. After removing high-scoring cells (Scrublet score >0.28, n=146 cells), we re-ran Scrublet and
observed additional likely doublets that had been residing at the core of a dense doublet cluster in the original data (round 2 Scrublet
score >0.28, n=34 cells). Following removal of these cells, a third round of Scrublet yielded no additional likely doublets.
2-D Visualization. Transcriptomes were visualized using the force-directed graph layout appearing in the original publication, with
minor modiﬁcations. Because the published plot was generated after removing doublets, we added doublets back to the visualiza-
tion by building a KNN graph (k=4) with all transcriptomes (ﬁltered as described above) and running a force-directed graph layout with
the positions of the original cells ﬁxed in place, allowing the remaining cells to relax. Alternative visualizations were generated from the
PCA coordinates t-SNE with perplexity=30 and angle=0.5 and UMAP using 10 nearest neighbors.
Marker Gene Co-expression Score. The marker gene co-expression score was created by identifying highly speciﬁc marker genes
for each cell type, smoothing expression of these genes over the four-nearest-neighbor graph (see ‘‘Graph-based smoothing’’,
below), and summing the products of pairs of non-overlapping marker genes. The combined marker overlap score was calculated
as described in the ‘‘Demuxlet PBMC dataset ’’ section, above.
We combined the following pairs of marker genes to identify doublets that were also detected by Scrublet ( Figure 6D):
Early erythroid and early neutrophil: Car1 x Mpo
Early erythroid and late neutrophil: Car1 x Ngp
MPP and late neutrophil: Cd34 x Ngp
And to identify macrophage-erythroblast doublets (n=37 cells) undetected by Scrublet ( Figure 6C):
C1qa x Hba-a1
Graph-Based Smoothing
We used a diffusion-based method to smooth data over the KNN graph for the purposes of ﬁnding overlapping marker gene expres-
sion (Figures 4F and 6D). In detail, we computed the smoothing operator S = expm(/C0 bL), where L is the Laplacian matrix of the KNN
graph, b is the strength of smoothing (b = 1 throughout), and expm is the matrix exponential (scipy.linalg.expm from the SciPy Python
package). If X* is the smoothed version of gene expression vector X, then X*= SX.
Scalability Testing
To test how Scrublet scales with cell number as shown in Figure S1 , we timed our implementation for different numbers of cells,
using a computer with a 2.1 GHz processor and 48 GB of memory, though this amount of memory was only necessary for the largest
Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019 e8


[PDF_PAGE 21]

datasets. Timing was broken into stages: preprocessing and embedding, doublet simulation, and the nearest neighbor classiﬁer. To
generate datasets of different sizes (n=10 replicates per dataset size), we randomly sampled the desired number of cells from the
Demuxlet PBMC dataset, and for each cell randomly sampled from its transcripts with replacement. Scrublet was then run on the
randomly sampled data, using, r =2 , br = 0:12 , and k = roundð0:5,
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
number of cells
p
Þ.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Python code and examples implementing the doublet detector are provided at github.com/AllonKleinLab/scrublet. Scrublet has also
been incorporated into SPRING ( kleintools.hms.harvard.edu/tools/spring.html), an interactive tool for single-cell data exploration
(Weinreb et al., 2018 ).
e9 Cell Systems 8, 281–291.e1–e9, April 24, 2019