[PDF_PAGE 1]

Article
Benchmarking Computational Doublet-Detection
Methods for Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Data
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Benchmark of nine computational doublet-detection
methods for scRNA-seq data
d Evaluation based on the most comprehensive set of real data
with labeled doublets
d Diverse performance and distinct advantages of different
doublet-detection methods
d DoubletFinder excels in detection accuracy; cxds leads in
computational efﬁciency
Authors
Nan Miles Xi, Jingyi Jessica Li
Correspondence
jli@stat.ucla.edu
In Brief
We conduct a systematic benchmark
study of nine cutting-edge computational
doublet-detection methods. We evaluate
the methods’ detection accuracy,
impacts on downstream analyses, and
computational efﬁciency, using a
comprehensive set of real and synthetic
data. Although no method dominates in
all aspects, the DoubletFinder and cxds
methods have the best detection
accuracy and computational efﬁciency,
respectively.
Xi & Li, 2021, Cell Systems 12, 176–194
February 17, 2021 ª 2020 Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.11.008 ll


[PDF_PAGE 2]

Article
Benchmarking Computational Doublet-Detection
Methods for Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Data
Nan Miles Xi 1 and Jingyi Jessica Li 1,2,3,4,*
1Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1554, USA
2Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7088, USA
3Department of Computational Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1766, USA
4Lead Contact
*Correspondence: jli@stat.ucla.edu
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2020.11.008
SUMMARY
In single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), doublets form when two cells are encapsulated into one reaction
volume. The existence of doublets, which appear to be—but are not—real cells, is a key confounder in
scRNA-seq data analysis. Computational methods have been developed to detect doublets in scRNA-seq
data; however, the scRNA-seq ﬁeld lacks a comprehensive benchmarking of these methods, making it difﬁ-
cult for researchers to choose an appropriate method for speciﬁc analyses. We conducted a systematic
benchmark study of nine cutting-edge computational doublet-detection methods. Our study included 16
real datasets, which contained experimentally annotated doublets, and 112 realistic synthetic datasets.
We compared doublet-detection methods regarding detection accuracy under various experimental set-
tings, impacts on downstream analyses, and computational efﬁciencies. Our results show that existing
methods exhibited diverse performance and distinct advantages in different aspects. Overall, the Doublet-
Finder method has the best detection accuracy, and the cxds method has the highest computational efﬁ-
ciency. A record of this paper’s transparent peer review process is included in the Supplemental Information.
INTRODUCTION
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a family of emerging
sequencing technologies that have revolutionized biomedical
sciences by revealing genome-wide gene expression levels
within each of thousands to millions of individual cells ( Saliba
et al., 2014 ; Kolodziejczyk et al., 2015 ; Vallejos et al., 2015 ).
Since its invention, scRNA-seq has become an essential exper-
imental approach to investigate cell-to-cell heterogeneity, distin-
guish cell types and subtypes, identify cell-type-speciﬁc genes,
and reveal cellular dynamic processes ( Liu and Trapnell, 2016 ;
Luecken and Theis, 2019 ). Among various scRNA-seq experi-
mental protocols, two major types—droplet microﬂuidics and
well-based protocols—have gained popularity because of their
high throughput, low cost per cell, and ability to detect unique
mRNA transcripts via unique molecular identiﬁers (UMIs) (Hwang
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019). Both types of protocols distribute
a cell suspension into reaction volumes (droplets or wells) to
hopefully encapsulate one cell per volume (i.e., a singlet), and
then mRNA molecules in each volume are labeled by a unique
droplet barcode. For simplicity, we will refer to a reaction volume
as a droplet in the following text.
During the distribution step of an scRNA-seq experiment,
however, one droplet may encapsulate more than one cell,
creating a so-called doublet that is disguised as a single cell
(Luecken and Theis, 2019 ). The doublet rate (i.e., the proportion
of doublets) in a scRNA-seq experiment depends on the
throughput and protocol, and doublets may constitute as many
as 40% of droplets ( Bernstein et al., 2020 ). There are two major
classes of doublets: homotypic doublets, which are formed by
transcriptionally similar cells; and heterotypic doublets, which
are formed by cells of distinct types, lineages, or states ( McGin-
nis et al., 2019a, 2019b; Wolock et al., 2019). Compared with ho-
motypic doublets, heterotypic doublets are generally easier to
detect due to their distinct gene expression proﬁles unlike those
of singlets ( McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b).
The existence of doublets, especially heterotypic doublets, in
scRNA-seq datasets may confound downstream analysis; for
example, doublets can form spurious cell clusters, interfere
with differentially expressed (DE) gene analysis, and obscure
the inference of cell developmental trajectories ( Luecken and
Theis, 2019 ; Wolock et al., 2019 ). Several experimental tech-
niques have been developed to detect doublets in scRNA-seq
using droplet barcodes. Example techniques include cell hash-
ing (doublets are the droplets whose barcodes are associated
with more than one oligo-tagged antibody) ( Stoeckius et al.,
2018), species mixture (doublets are the droplets whose barco-
des are associated with more than one species) ( Wolock et al.,
2019), demuxlet (doublets are the droplets whose barcodes
are associated with mutually exclusive sets of SNPs) ( Kang
et al., 2018 ), and MULTI-seq (doublets are the droplets whose
barcodes are associated with more than one lipid-tagged index)
176 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 ª 2020 Elsevier Inc.
ll


[PDF_PAGE 3]

(McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b). However, these techniques
require special experimental preparation, extra costs, and
time, and they are not guaranteed to remove all doublets, e.g.,
demuxlet cannot detect the doublets formed by cells from the
same individual. Moreover, they cannot remove doublets from
existing scRNA-seq data.
Realizing the limitations of experimental strategies, re-
searchers have attempted to tackle this doublet challenge from
an alternative perspective: developing computational methods
to detect doublets from already-generated scRNA-seq data
(Luecken and Theis, 2019 ). So far, nine doublet-detection
methods have been developed (with software packages and
full-text manuscripts) based on distinct algorithm designs ( Lun
et al., 2016; Gayoso and Shor, 2018; Bais and Kostka, 2020; De-
Pasquale et al., 2019 ; McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b; Wolock
et al., 2019; Bernstein et al., 2020 )( Table 1). Here is a brief sum-
mary of these methods except hybrid, which is a combination of
two methods: bcds and cxds. Seven out of the eight methods
(with cxds as the only exception) ﬁrst generate artiﬁcial doublets
by combining gene expression proﬁles of two randomly selected
droplets. Except DoubletDecon, the other six methods subse-
quently deﬁne a doublet score for each original droplet as the
level of similarity the droplet has to those artiﬁcial doublets;
next, with a pre-deﬁned or user-speciﬁed threshold, they detect
doublets as the original droplets whose doublet scores exceed
the threshold. The key difference of the seven artiﬁcial-
doublet-based methods is how they distinguish original droplets
from artiﬁcial doublets: Five of them use classiﬁcation algorithms
(Scrublet, doubletCells, and DoubletFinder use k-nearest neigh-
bors [kNN]; bcds uses gradient boosting; Solo uses neural net-
works), DoubletDetection uses the hypergeometric test, and
DoubletDecon decides whether an original droplet resembles
an artiﬁcial doublets based on its deconvolution algorithm (unlike
other methods, DoubletDecon identiﬁes doublets without
providing doublet scores). As the only method that does not
generate artiﬁcial doublets, cxds deﬁnes doublet scores based
on gene co-expression, and similar to the other six doublet-
score-based methods, it subsequently thresholds doublet
scores to identify doublets.
While each computational doublet-detection method was
shown to perform well under certain metrics by its developers,
currently there is no systematic, third-party benchmarking of
these methods’ doublet-detection accuracy, effects on down-
stream analysis, or computation efﬁciency. As a result, users
lack guidelines to choose an appropriate doublet-detection
method for their analysis task. Hence, a detailed assessment
of existing doublet-detection methods is in great demand. In
addition to assisting users, it will provide useful guidance for
computationalists to improve existing methods or develop new
methods.
Here, we conducted a comprehensive benchmark study of
computational methods for doublet detection. We evaluated
nine cutting-edge methods—doubletCells ( Lun et al., 2016 ),
Scrublet ( Wolock et al., 2019 ), cxds ( Bais and Kostka, 2020 ),
bcds ( Bais and Kostka, 2020 ), hybrid ( Bais and Kostka, 2020 ),
Solo ( Bernstein et al., 2020 ), DoubletDetection ( Gayoso and
Shor, 2018 ), DoubletFinder ( McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b),
and DoubletDecon ( DePasquale et al., 2019 )—in three aspects.
First, we compared their overall doublet-detection accuracy us-
ing two criteria: the area under the precision-recall curve
(AUPRC) and the area under the receiver operating character-
istic curve (AUROC), on a collection of 16 real scRNA-seq data-
sets containing experimentally annotated doublets. To further
evaluate the performance of these methods under various
experimental settings, we simulated 80 realistic scRNA-seq da-
tasets and evaluated the AUPRC and AUROC of each method
under a wide range of doublet rates, sequencing depths,
numbers of cell types, and cell-type heterogeneity levels. Sec-
ond, considering that the ultimate goal of doublet detection is
to improve the accuracy of downstream scRNA-seq data ana-
lyses, we compared these nine doublet-detection methods in
terms of their impacts on four downstream analyses: DE gene
analysis, highly variable gene identiﬁcation, cell clustering, and
cell trajectory inference. We simulated seven doublet-containing
scRNA-seq datasets with pre-deﬁned cell types, DE genes, and
cell trajectories. Then, we evaluated the accuracy of the four
downstream analyses by their state-of-the-art computational
methods before and after doublets were removed by each
doublet-detection method. The rationale is that a good
doublet-detection method should improve the accuracy of
downstream analyses after its use. Third, we compared the
computational efﬁciency of doublet-detection methods in as-
pects, including distributed computing, speed, scalability, stabil-
ity, and usability.
In summary, the nine doublet-detection methods exhibited a
large variation in their performance under each evaluation crite-
rion. First, the benchmarking result of detection accuracy shows
that there is still room for improvement: The best method Dou-
bletFinder achieved a mean AUPRC value of 0.537 on 16 real da-
tasets. On simulated datasets, most methods performed better
on datasets with higher doublet rates, larger sequencing depths,
more cell types, or greater heterogeneity between cell types.
Second, we observed that doublet removal by most methods
indeed improved the identiﬁcation of DE genes and highly vari-
able genes, the elimination of spurious cell clusters, and the
inference of cell trajectories; yet, the degree of improvement var-
ied from method to method. Third, most methods except cxds
had deteriorated performance under distributed computing,
because global data information was lost in each distributed
data batch. The cxds method also performed the best in terms
of speed and scalability. Overall, DoubletFinder is highlighted
as the best computational doublet-detection method for its high-
est detection accuracy and largest improvement on downstream
analyses, while cxds is found as the most computationally efﬁ-
cient method in our benchmark.
RESULTS
Doublet-Detection Accuracy on Real scRNA-Seq
Datasets
To evaluate the overall doublet-detection accuracy of the nine
methods, we collected 16 public scRNA-seq datasets with dou-
blets annotated by experimental techniques ( Kang et al., 2018 ;
Stoeckius et al., 2018 ; McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b; Wolock
et al., 2019 )( STAR Methods ). Our collection covers a variety of
cell types, droplet and gene numbers, doublet rates, and
sequencing depths, thus representing varying levels of difﬁculty
in detecting doublets from scRNA-seq data ( Table S1 ). To the
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 177


[PDF_PAGE 4]

Table 1. An Overview of Nine Computational Doublet-Detection Methods Evaluated in this Study
Method
Programming
Language Version
Artiﬁcial
Doublets Dimension Reduction
Guidance on
Threshold Selection Algorithm Description
Scrublet
(Wolock et al., 2019 )
Python 0.2.1 yes principal component
analysis (PCA)
yes It generates artiﬁcial doublets by adding
two randomly selected droplets’ gene
expression proﬁles. The doublet score of
each droplet is deﬁned as the proportion of
artiﬁcial doublets among its k-nearest
neighboring droplets in the principal
component (PC) space, whose number of
dimensions is speciﬁed by users.
doubletCells
(Lun et al., 2016 )
R 1.16.0 yes PCA no It generates artiﬁcial doublets by adding
two randomly selected droplets’ gene
expression proﬁles. For each droplet, it
calculates the proportion of artiﬁcial
doublets, p
A, in a neighborhood in the PC
space, whose number of dimensions is
speciﬁed by users. The radius of the
neighborhood is set to be the median
distance from the droplet to its 50th nearest
neighbor. The doublet score of each droplet
is deﬁned as p
A=ð1 /C0 pA Þ2.
cxds (Bais and
Kostka, 2020)
R 1.2.0 no highly variable genes no It calculates a p value for each pair of genes
under the null hypothesis that the number of
droplets where exactly one of the two genes
is expressed follows a binomial distribution.
The doublet score of each droplet is deﬁned
as the sum of negative (natural) log p values
of co-expressed gene pairs, where two
genes in each pair both have non-zero
expression levels in this droplet.
bcds (Bais and
Kostka, 2020)
R 1.2.0 yes highly variable genes no It generates artiﬁcial doublets by adding
two randomly selected droplets’ gene
expression proﬁles and pools these artiﬁcial
doublets with the original droplets. Then it
trains a gradient boosting classiﬁer to
classify the pooled droplets into original
droplets and artiﬁcial doublets. The doublet
score of each droplet is deﬁned as the
predicted probability of being an artiﬁcial
doublet.
Hybrid (Bais and
Kostka, 2020)
R 1.2.0 – – no It normalizes the doublet scores of cxds and
bcds to values between 0 and 1. The
doublet score of each droplet is deﬁned as
the sum of the two normalized doublet
scores.
(Continued on next page )
ll
Article
178 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 5]

Table 1. Continued
Method
Programming
Language Version
Artiﬁcial
Doublets Dimension Reduction
Guidance on
Threshold Selection Algorithm Description
DoubletDetection
(Gayoso and Shor, 2018 )
Python 2.5.2 yes PCA no It generates artiﬁcial doublets by adding two
randomly selected droplets’ gene expression
proﬁles and pools these artiﬁcial doublets
with the original droplets. Then it conducts
Louvain clustering on the pooled droplets.
For each droplet cluster, it performs a
hypergeometric test and computes p value =
1 - hypergeom.cdf(N, K, n, k), where N is the
number of droplets, K is the number of
artiﬁcial doublets, n is the number of droplets
in this cluster, and k is the number of artiﬁcial
doublets in this cluster. All droplets in this
cluster will have the same p value. It repeats
the above steps (starting from artiﬁcial
doublet generation) for a user-speciﬁed
number of runs. The doublet score of each
droplet is deﬁned as its average p value
across all runs.
DoubletFinder
(McGinnis et al.,
2019a, 2019b)
R 2.0.3 yes PCA yes It generates artiﬁcial doublets by averaging
two randomly selected droplets’ gene
expression proﬁles. The doublet score of
each droplet is deﬁned as the proportion of
artiﬁcial doublets among its k-nearest
neighboring droplets in the PC space, whose
number of dimensions is speciﬁed by users.
The number of neighbors, k, is selected by
maximizing the mean-variance normalized
bimodality coefﬁcient (Pﬁster et al., 2013)o f
the distribution of doublet scores.
Solo (Bernstein et al., 2020 ) Linux command 0.5 yes variational
autoencoder
0.5 by default For a randomly selected droplet pair, it
estimates a multinomial distribution whose
number of trials equals the sum of total
counts in these two droplets and whose
event probabilities equal the gene
proportions calculated from the mean gene
expression proﬁle of these two droplets.
Then it generates artiﬁcial doublets by
randomly sampling a gene expression
proﬁle from this multinomial distribution.
That is, the number of artiﬁcial doublets
equals the number of randomly selected
droplet pairs. These artiﬁcial doublets are
pooled with the original droplets. Then it
trains a neural network to classify the
pooled droplets into original droplets and
artiﬁcial doublets. The doublet score of
each droplet is deﬁned as the predicted
probability of being an artiﬁcial doublet.
(Continued on next page )
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 179


[PDF_PAGE 6]

best of our knowledge, our collection is by far the most compre-
hensive set of scRNA-seq data that contains experimentally vali-
dated doublets, and it can serve as a benchmark standard for
future method development.
To benchmark the nine methods, we included two baseline
methods, which simply use the library size (lsize) and the number
of expressed genes (ngene) of each droplet as their respective
doublet-detection criterion ( Luecken and Theis, 2019 ; Wolock
et al., 2019 ). Except for DoubletDecon, all the methods output
a doublet score for each droplet ( Table 1 ; The two baseline
methods have lsize and ngene as their doublet scores; a droplet
with a larger score is more likely a doublet), and we deﬁned their
detection accuracy as their AUPRC and AUROC values ( STAR
Methods). We found that all the methods successfully output
their identiﬁed doublets from all the 16 datasets except
DoubletDetection, which could not run on the pdx-MULTI data-
set. Across the 16 datasets, each method exhibited a large vari-
ance in its detection accuracy, and no method consistently
achieved the top performance ( Figures 1 A and 1B; Tables S2
and S3). Compared with the two baseline methods, doubletCells
was the only method that did not outperform them on a majority
of datasets, while Solo and hybrid were the only two methods
that consistently outperformed them on all datasets ( Table S4 ).
Overall, DoubletFinder and Solo achieved the highest mean
AUPRC and AUROC values across datasets, respectively ( Ta-
bles S2 and S3). DoubletFinder was also the top-performing
method on the most datasets in terms of both AUPRC and
AUROC ( Table S4 ). We note that all the methods had AUPRC
values much lower than their AUROC values on every dataset,
an expected phenomenon given the imbalance between the
number of singlets and doublets. Since AUROC is an overly opti-
mistic measure of accuracy under such imbalanced scenarios
(Branco et al., 2016 ), we will focus on AUPRC in the following
discussion.
The highest AUPRC value on each dataset ranged from 0.239
to 1.000, with a mean of 0.570 across the 16 datasets ( Table S2).
This large discrepancy between datasets is further exempliﬁed
by the fact that several methods achieved almost perfect
AUPRC values on two datasets: hm-12k and hm-6k, while all
the methods performed poorly on another two datasets:
pbmc-1B-dm and J293t-dm (with AUPRC values under 0.335).
A likely reason for this discrepancy is the annotation of doublets
in these real datasets. In hm-12k and hm-6k, doublets were an-
notated as the droplets that contain cells of two species, so all
annotated doublets were heterotypic and easy to identify ( Bais
and Kostka, 2020 ; McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b; Wolock
et al., 2019 ; Bernstein et al., 2020 ). In contrast, doublets anno-
tated in the other datasets might have included homotypic dou-
blets that are difﬁcult to identify, posing a challenge to doublet-
detection methods; or they might have missed certain heterotyp-
ic doublets (e.g., if doublets are deﬁned as the droplets that
contain cells from two individuals, then heterotypic doublets
formed by cells of different types within an individual would be
missed), creating a downward bias in the calculation of detection
accuracy (see further discussion in the STAR Methods). In addi-
tion, varied data quality and cell heterogeneity pose different
levels of difﬁculty to doublet detection. The highest mean
AUPRC value, which was achieved by DoubletFinder, was only
0.537. These results demonstrate the general difﬁculty in
Table 1. Continued
Method
Programming
Language Version
Artiﬁcial
Doublets Dimension Reduction
Guidance on
Threshold Selection Algorithm Description
DoubletDecon
(DePasquale et al., 2019 )
R 1.1.5 yes deconvolution doublet detection
without doublet scores
It generates artiﬁcial doublets by taking a
weighted average of two randomly selected
droplets’ gene expression proﬁles (the
default weights are 0.7 and 0.3). Putative
doublets are deﬁned as those droplets
whose gene expression proﬁles after
deconvolution (Gong and Szustakowski,
2013) are concentrated on the centroids of
artiﬁcial doublet clusters. Finally, it deﬁnes
doublets as those putative doublets whose
gene expression proﬁles are dissimilar to
those of original droplet clusters.
ll
Article
180 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 7]

detecting doublets from scRNA-seq data and suggest possible
room for improvement by future method development.
Motivated by the fact that doublets are identiﬁed based on a
single threshold in practice, we further examined the detection
accuracy of doublet-detection methods under a speciﬁc identi-
ﬁcation rate, i.e., the percentage of droplets identiﬁed as dou-
blets. For each method, the top 10%, 20%, and 40% droplets
with the highest doublet scores were identiﬁed as doublets,
C
BA
Figure 1. Evaluation of the Eight Doublet Detection Methods (Except DoubletDecon) Using 16 Benchmark scRNA-seq Datasets
(A and B) Performance (AUPRC and AUROC values) of each method applied to benchmark datasets, with (A) showing the distributions and (B) showing the values
per dataset (white squares indicating failed runs); two baseline methods (lsize and ngene) are included in the comparison.
(C) Precision, recall, and TNRs of each method under the 10%, 20%, or 40% identiﬁcation rate, which is the percentage of droplets that received the high est
doublet scores and were identiﬁed as doublets.
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 181


[PDF_PAGE 8]

and the corresponding precision, recall, and true negative rates
(TNRs) were calculated ( Figure 1 C; Table S5 ). As expected,
higher identiﬁcation rates led to higher recall and lower TNR
values. Interestingly, the precision decreased as the identiﬁca-
tion rate increased, a phenomenon suggesting that all doublet-
detection methods tend to assign higher doublet scores to anno-
tated doublets and are thus desirable ( Figure 1C). The compari-
son of doublet-detection methods gave a result consistent with
that based on the overall detection accuracy measures, AUPRC
and AUROC. DoubletFinder and Solo were still the top two
methods in terms of the mean precision, recall, and TNR, where
the mean was calculated across the 16 datasets ( Table S5).
Since DoubletDecon cannot output doublet scores, we could
not calculate its AUPRC or AUROC on a dataset, and thus,
excluded it from the previous comparison. To fairly compare
DoubletDecon with other methods, we ran DoubletDecon on
every dataset and recorded its number of identiﬁed doublets if
successful; then, we thresholded the doublet scores of other
methods so that they identiﬁed the same number of doublets
as DoubletDecon did. Based on the resulting doublets identiﬁed
by each method from every dataset, we calculated the precision,
recall, and TNR (STAR Methods). By these three criteria, Double-
tDecon and doubletCells did not outperform the baseline
methods lsize and ngene. Among the other seven methods,
Solo and DoubletFinder achieved the highest precision and
TNRs, while Solo and hybrid obtained the highest recall rates
(Figure S1 A; Tables S6–S8 ). Moreover, we observed that Dou-
bletDecon failed to run on four datasets (hm-12k, pbmc-2ctrl-
dm, J293t-dm, and nuc-MULTI) and tended to overestimate
the number of doublets (Table S9). Our results suggest that Dou-
bletDecon needs improvement in its accuracy and robustness.
Adding the functionality that outputs doublet scores will also
enhance the usability of DoubletDecon, because users can
then have the ﬂexibility to decide the number of doublets to be
detected and removed based on their preference and knowl-
edge (Bloom, 2018).
Doublet-Detection Accuracy on Synthetic scRNA-Seq
Data under Various Experimental Settings and
Biological Conditions
To thoroughly evaluate the performance of doublet-detection
methods under a wide range of experimental settings and biolog-
ical conditions, we utilized scDesign (Li and Li, 2019), a statistical
simulator that generates realistic scRNA-seq datasets well
mimicking real data generated by a variety of scRNA-seq experi-
mental protocols. It is advantageous to use synthetic data to
benchmark doublet-detection methods, because we would
have the access to ground-truth doublets and the ﬂexibility to
vary experimental settings and biological conditions in a compre-
hensive way. Speciﬁcally, we generated 80 scRNA-seq datasets
with varying doublet rates (i.e., percentages of doublets),
sequencing depths, cell types, and between-cell-type heteroge-
neity levels ( STAR Methods ). Except for DoubletDecon, we
applied every doublet-detection method to all these synthetic da-
tasets and calculated its AUPRC values to measure its accuracy.
Figure 2A shows how the performance of every method changed
as we varied the doublet rate, the sequencing depth, the number
of cell types, or the between-cell-type heterogeneity level.
First, all the eight methods had improved accuracy as the
doublet rate increased. This result is not surprising, as these
methods all formulated the doublet-detection problem, explic-
itly or implicitly, as a binary classiﬁcation problem where the
two classes are singlets and doublets. The more balanced
the two classes are in size, the easier the binary classiﬁcation
is, in general. Given the fact that under both droplet microﬂui-
dics and well-based scRNA-seq protocols, doublets are more
likely to form as the number of cells increases ( Zheng et al.,
2017; Luecken and Theis, 2019 ; Wolock et al., 2019 ), our
result suggests that doublet-de tection methods would work
more effectively on scRNA-seq datasets with more cells (or
droplets). This ﬁnding agrees with our previous result that all
the methods performed the worst on the J293t-dm dataset,
which contains only 500 droplets, the fewest among all the
16 datasets.
Second, we found that the performance of these methods
consistently beneﬁted from a larger sequencing depth. This is
in line with the expectation that deeper sequencing creates a
higher data resolution, making doublet-detection methods
more capable of differentiating doublets from singlets.
Third, we evaluated the impact of the number of cell types on
the accuracy of doublet-detection methods. It is expected that a
cell mixture with more cell types would result in more heterotypic
doublets, which are formed by cells of different types. Thanks to
their distinct gene expression proﬁles that do not resemble those
of any cell types, heterotypic doublets are, in general, easier to
detect than homotypic doublets, which are formed by cells of
the same type (Wolock et al., 2019). As expected, most methods
exhibited improved accuracy as the number of cell types
increased, with cxds, bcds, and hybrid (a combination of cxds
and bcds) as the only three exceptions.
Fourth, we investigated how the between-cell-type heterogene-
ity level—the extent to which gene expression proﬁles differ be-
tween cell types—would affect the accuracy of doublet detection.
In theory, the greater the heterogeneity, the more distinct hetero-
typic doublets are from singlets. Again, all the methods ﬁt this the-
ory except cxds, bcds, and hybrid. Hence, we saw consistent re-
sults about the effects of the number of cell types and the
between-cell-type heterogeneity level on doublet detection.
We also compared the AUROC values of the eight doublet-
detection methods on the same synthetic scRNA-seq datasets
as above ( Figure S1 B). Consistent with our AUPRC results,
most methods performed better on the datasets with a higher
doublet rate, a larger sequencing depth, more cell types, or a
greater level of between-cell-type heterogeneity, though the
improvement in AUROC was less signiﬁcant than in AUPRC.
This is expected as AUPRC is a better accuracy measure than
AUROC for imbalanced binary classiﬁcation ( Saito and Re-
hmsmeier, 2015 ). Combining our AUPRC and AUROC results,
we found DoubletFinder as the top-performing method across
all the experimental settings and biological conditions we stud-
ied. DoubletDetection and Scrublet also demonstrated strong
performance compared with the rest of methods. We excluded
DoubletDecon from this comparison and the following DE gene
identiﬁcation, highly variable gene identiﬁcation, cell clustering,
and cell trajectory inference analyses, because it failed to run
on most of our synthetic datasets, likely due to its software im-
plementation issue ( Github, 2020).
ll
Article
182 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 9]

Effects of Doublet Detection on DE Gene Analysis
The existence of doublets in scRNA-seq datasets is expected to
confound the downstream DE gene analysis by violating the
necessary ‘‘identical distribution’’ assumption (i.e., cells of the
same type follow the same distribution of gene expression levels)
in statistical tests ( Luecken and Theis, 2019 ). As a result, if a
doublet-detection method is effective, its doublet removal
should improve the accuracy of DE gene analysis. To evaluate
the eight doublet-detection methods from this perspective, we
used scDesign to generate a synthetic scRNA-seq dataset
A
BC D
EF
Figure 2. Evaluation of the Eight Doublet-Detection Methods (Except DoubletDecon) Using Four Simulation Studies, and the Effects of
Doublet Detection on DE Analysis, HVGs Identiﬁcation, and Cell Clustering
(A) Performance (AUPRC values) of each method in four simulation settings: varying doublet rates (from 2% to 40% with a step size of 2%), varying sequen cing
depths (from 500 to 10,000 UMI counts per cell, with a step size of 500 counts), varying numbers of cell types (from 2 to 20 with a step size of 1), and 20 het-
erogeneity levels, which specify the extent to which genes are differentiated between two cell types ( STAR Methods).
(B) Precision, recall, and TNR by each of three differential expression (DE) methods: DESeq2, MAST, and the Wilcoxon rank-sum test (Wilcox), after ea ch of the
eight doublet-detection methods was applied to a simulated dataset; for negative and positive controls, we included the DE accuracies on the contaminated data
with 40% doublets and the clean data without doublets.
(C) We re-illustrate the results in (B) by showing the improved DE accuracy in each metric (precision, recall, and TNR) after removing detected double ts from the
contaminated data; the results on the clean data without doublets are shown as a positive control.
(D) Left panel: the Jaccard index between the post-doublet-detection HVGs of each doublet-detection method and the clean HVGs under the 10%, 20%, or 4 0%
doublet rate. The Jaccard index between the contaminated HVGs and the clean HVGs was used as negative control for each doublet rate. Right panel: illustration
of the left panel; the improved Jaccard indices upon the negative controls (i.e., Jaccard index differences) after the detected doublets by each meth od were
removed from the contaminated data.
(E) Cell clustering result by the Louvain algorithm after each of the eight doublet-detection method was applied to remove a varying percentage of dro plets as the
identiﬁed doublets (y axis, from 0% to 25% with step size of 1%); the true numbers of cell clusters are four, six, and eight under three simulation settin gs, each
containing 20% true doublets; the yellow color indicates that the correct number of clusters was identiﬁed, while the red color indicates otherwise. The true
percentage of doublets, 20%, is highlighted in blue. For each method, its average correctness (i.e., the percent of yellow colors across all the remov al per-
centages) is also highlighted in blue.
(F) Under the same three simulation settings as in (A), the distributions of the singlet proportions are shown after doublet removal by each method, if the remaining
droplets led to the correct number of cell clusters in (A); doubletCells is not shown for the four-cluster setting, because it did not lead to the correc t number of cell
clusters in (A).
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 183


[PDF_PAGE 10]

with two cell types and 1,126 between-cell-type DE genes (6% of
a total of 18,760 genes; STAR Methods). We referred to this da-
taset as the ‘‘clean data.’’ We then mixed each cell type with
randomly forming doublets by targeting a 40% doublet rate,
and the resulting dataset was referred to as the ‘‘contaminated
data.’’ Next, we applied each doublet-detection method to the
dataset and removed 40% droplets (with the highest doublet
scores assigned by each method) from the contaminated data.
Finally, we conducted DE gene analysis using three methods—
DESeq2 ( Love et al., 2014 ), MAST ( Finak et al., 2015 ), and Wil-
coxon rank-sum test ( Fay and Proschan, 2010 )—on the clean
data, the contaminated data, and the dataset after each
doublet-detection method was applied. The DE gene analysis
result was summarized in three accuracy measures: precision,
recall, and TNR, all of which were calculated under the Bonfer-
roni-corrected p value threshold of 0.05, the default threshold
used by DESeq2 and MAST ( Wang et al., 2019 ).
We benchmarked the accuracy resulted from each doublet-
detection method against the negative control (the accuracy
based on the contaminated data) and the positive control (the
accuracy based on the clean data). Figure 2 B shows that all
the three DE methods achieved extremely high precision (>
98%) and TNRs (> 97%) even on the contaminated data, an ex-
pected result because these DE methods all utilize statistical
tests and are inherently conservative in their identiﬁcation of
DE genes. Such conservativeness makes these DE methods
only identify the genes that are highly likely DE, leading to high
precision (the percentage of true DE genes among the identiﬁed
genes) and TNR (the percentage of non-identiﬁed genes among
the true non-DE genes). Although the TNR result seems counter-
intuitive as the TNR values after doublet detection and removal
even exceeded the TNR values of the clean data by around
0.005, this difference was merely due to the statistical uncer-
tainty of these TNR values and thus is not conclusive. On the
other hand, recall (the percentage of identiﬁed genes among
the true DE genes) is an informative measure that reﬂects the
negative inﬂuence of doublets: For all the three DE methods,
their recall dropped from ~70% on the clean data to ~63% on
the contaminated data. Pleasantly, all the eight doublet-detec-
tion methods were effective in improving the recall ( Figure 2 C).
In particular, DoubletFinder, doubletCells, bcds, and hybrid
consistently had top performance, regardless of the choice of
DE methods. This result conﬁrms that removing doublets is
indeed beneﬁcial for DE gene analysis.
Effects of Doublet Detection on Highly Variable Gene
Identiﬁcation
The identiﬁcation of highly variable genes (HVGs) is an essential
step that precedes cell dimension reduction, cell clustering, and
cell trajectory inference in scRNA-seq data analysis ( Yip et al.,
2019). The goal of this step is to identify HVGs, i.e., the informative
genes that exhibit strong cell-to-cell variations and thus can distin-
guish cells, so that the dimensions of each cell can be reduced
from tens of thousands of genes to thousands, or even hundreds
of genes, to facilitate those downstream analyses. Considering
the importance of HVG identiﬁcation, we evaluated the extent to
which the identiﬁcation would be negatively affected by doublets
(Amezquita et al., 2020 ) and how much the eight doublet-detec-
tion methods could alleviate such negative impacts.
For this purpose, we simulated a clean scRNA-seq dataset
without doublets by scDesign, and then we added randomly
formed doublets to generate three contaminated datasets
with 10%, 20%, and 40% doublet rates. For each contami-
nated dataset, we applied the eight doublet-detection methods
to remove a percentage of droplets that received the highest
doublet scores, and the percentage was set as the dataset’s
doublet rate. As a result, each contaminated dataset corre-
sponds to eight post-doublet-detection datasets. Then, we
used Seurat ( Butler et al., 2018 ; Stuart et al., 2019 ) to identify
HVGs from the clean dataset, the three contaminated datasets,
and the 24 post-doublet-detection datasets. We refer to the
identiﬁcation results as a set of clean HVGs, three sets of
contaminated HVGs, and 24 sets of post-doublet-detection
HVGs. An effective doublet-detection method is expected to
result in post-doublet-detection HVGs that agree better with
the clean HVGs than the corresponding contaminated HVGs
do. To measure the agreement between two sets of HVGs,
we used the Jaccard index, which is the ratio of the size of
the intersection to the size of the union of the two sets. The
larger the Jaccard index, the better agreement the two sets
have. In our evaluation, for each doublet rate, the Jaccard in-
dex between the contaminated HVGs and the clean HVGs
served as the negative control.
Figure 2 D shows that the negative control Jaccard index
decreased from 0.772 to 0.447 as the doublet rate increased
from 10% to 40%, matching our expectation. Among the eight
doublet-detection methods, DoubletFinder and Scrublet were
the only two methods whose post-doublet-detection HVGs
consistently led to better Jaccard indices than the negative con-
trols under all three doublet rates. Notably, the beneﬁt of doublet
detection on HVG identiﬁcation was most obvious at the 40%
doublet rate, under which all the doublet-detection methods out-
performed the negative control.
Effects of Doublet Detection on Cell Clustering
Another major motivation to remove doublets from scRNA-seq data
is to avoid the misinterpretation of spurious cell clusters (i.e., droplet
clusters) formed by heterotypic doublets as novel cell types
(Luecken and Theis, 2019; Wolock et al., 2019). To evaluate the ca-
pacity of doublet-detection methods for removing spurious cell
clusters, we used scDesign to simulate realistic scRNA-seq data-
sets composed of four, six, or eight cell types and mixed with
20% randomly forming doublets (i.e., the true doublet rate is
20%). We performed cell clustering on each of these datasets after
applying every doublet-detection method and removing a certain
percent of droplets that received the highest doublet scores from
that method ( STAR Methods). Considering that the true doublet
rate is unknown and difﬁcult to estimate in practice, we varied this
removal percentage from 0% to 25%, with a step size of 1%. For
the subsequent cell clustering, we followed the most popular Seurat
method to apply the Louvain clustering algorithm ( Blondel et al.,
2008), which automatically determines the number of cell clusters
in a data-driven way. Then for each dataset, every doublet-detec-
tion method, and each removal percentage, we compared the num-
ber of cell clusters with the number of cell types.
Figure 2 E shows that, under the ideal scenario that the
removal percentage was set to the true doublet rate 20%,
four methods (Scrublet, Solo, DoubletDetection, and
ll
Article
184 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 11]

A
B
C D
Figure 3. Effects of Doublet Detection on Cell Trajectory Inference
(A) Trajectories constructed by Slingshot after each of the eight doublet-detection methods were applied to remove the identiﬁed doublets, whose pe rcentage
among all the droplets was set to 20%, the percentage of true doublets in the simulated dataset. The true cell topology is bifurcating. For negative and positive
controls, we included the trajectories constructed on the original dataset with 20% doublets and its cleaned version without doublets.
(B) Trajectories constructed by MST after each of the eight doublet-detection methods were applied to remove the identiﬁed doublets, whose percenta ge among
all the droplets was set to 20%, the percentage of true doublets in the simulated dataset. The true cell topology is a conjunction of three trajectories . For negative
and positive controls, we included the trajectories constructed on the original dataset with 20% doublets and its cleaned version without doublets.
(C) Precision, recall, and TNR of temporally DE genes identiﬁed by the GAM applied to trajectories constructed by Slingshot and TSCAN, after each of th e eight
doublet-detection method was applied to remove the identiﬁed doublets, whose percentage among all the droplets was set to 20%, the percentage of true
(legend continued on next page)
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 185


[PDF_PAGE 12]

DoubletFinder) consistently removed spurious cell clusters
and led to the correct numbers of cell types. Among the eight
methods, DoubletDetection and DoubletFinder exhibited the
most robust performance, as they successfully led to the cor-
rect numbers of cell types under the widest range of removal
percentages. Scrublet and Solo also exhibited good perfor-
mance in removing spurious cell clusters. In contrast, dou-
bletCells, cxds, bcds, and hybrid all had unstable perfor-
mance, and they did not alwa ys remove spurious cell
clusters even under the ideal scenario (when the removal per-
centage was set to 20%). Overall, this result supports the use
of DoubletDetection and Doub letFinder to remove doublets
before the application of cell clustering to identify novel
cell types.
Unlike heterotypic doublets, homotypic doublets do not form
spurious clusters because of their similar gene expression pro-
ﬁles to those of singlets of the same cell type ( Wolock et al.,
2019). In other words, homotypic doublets tend to cluster
together with singlets. Even though the existence of homotypic
doublets does not much affect cell clustering, it may potentially
bias the identiﬁcation of cell-type-speciﬁc genes by DE gene
analysis because homotypic doublets are not real cells. To eval-
uate the capacity of doublet-detection methods in eliminating
homotypic doublets, we calculated the proportion of singlets in
each identiﬁed cell cluster when the number of cell clusters
matched the number of cell types in Figure 2E( STAR Methods).
Figure 2F shows that Scrublet led to cell clusters with the highest
proportions of singlets. DoubletDetection and DoubletFinder
also had excellent performance, and these three methods all
clearly outperformed the rest of the methods. Combining the re-
sults in Figures 2 E and 2F, we conclude that Scrublet, Double-
tDetection, and DoubletFinder demonstrated the best capacity
in removing heterotypic and homotypic doublets.
To examine how robust the above results are to the choice
of clustering algorithms, we repeated the above analyses us-
ing a second clustering algorithm: the density-based spatial
clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) ( Ester et al.,
1996). Compared with the Louvain clustering algorithm, the
DBSCAN algorithm led to the corr ect numbers of cell clusters
under fewer and more sporadic removal percentages for all
the doublet-detection methods ( Figure S2 A). This result sug-
gests that the DBSCAN algorithm works less effectively than
the Louvain algorithm for clustering cells in scRNA-seq data
(Duo` et al., 2018 ; Feng et al., 2020 ). Nevertheless, with the
DBSCAN algorithm, Scrublet, DoubletDetection, and Doublet-
Finder still achieved the top performance in removing spurious
cell clusters and homotypic doublets ( Figures S2 Aa n dS 2 B ) .
In summary, based on the results of two clustering algorithms,
we would recommend DoubletDetection and DoubletFinder
as the top two choices for removing spurious cell clusters in
cell clustering analysis, and we identiﬁed Scrublet and Dou-
bletFinder as the best-performing algorithms for removing ho-
motypic doublets before the identiﬁcation of cell-type-spe-
ciﬁc genes.
Effects of Doublet Detection on Cell Trajectory
Inference
Another important scRNA-seq data analysis is to infer a cell tra-
jectory, which corresponds to a cellular process, such as cell dif-
ferentiation, immune responses, and carcinogenesis, based on
the similarity of cells in terms of gene expression proﬁles ( Sae-
lens et al., 2019). An inferred cell trajectory is called pseudotime,
an ordering of cells in a path or a tree ( Trapnell et al., 2014 ). The
accuracy of cell trajectory inference depends on both the infer-
ence methods and the scRNA-seq data quality. Similar to cell
clustering, cell trajectory inference is also biased by the exis-
tence of doublets ( Tian et al., 2019 ). In particular, heterotypic
doublets may result in spurious branches in an inferred trajec-
tory. We expect that doublet-detection methods, if effective,
should increase the accuracy of cell trajectory inference.
To evaluate the eight doublet-detection methods from this
perspective, we used Splatter ( Zappia et al., 2017 ) to generate
two scRNA-seq datasets: one including a bifurcating trajectory
and the other containing a conjunction of three sequential tra-
jectories ( STAR Methods ). We referred to them as ‘‘clean
data.’’ We then mixed the two datasets with randomly forming
doublets by targeting a 20% doublet rate, and the resulting da-
tasets were referred to as the ‘‘contaminated data.’’ Similar to
our DE gene analysis, we used each doublet-detection method
to remove 20% droplets (with the highest doublet scores as-
signed by that method) from each contaminated dataset. As
a result, we obtained two suites of datasets corresponding to
a bifurcating trajectory and a conjunction of three sequential
trajectories, with each suite containing the clean data, the
contaminated data, and the data cleaned by each doublet-
detection method. For cell trajectory inference, we applied
Slingshot ( Street et al., 2018 ) to the ﬁrst suite of datasets ( Fig-
ure 3A) and minimum spanning tree (MST) ( Herring et al., 2018 )
to the second suite of datasets ( Figure 3B). We chose Slingshot
and MST because they were the top-performing methods in
previous benchmark studies ( Saelens et al., 2019 ; Tian et al.,
2019). We considered the cell trajectories inferred from the
clean data and the contaminated data as the positive and
negative controls, respectively.
Figures 3A and 3B show that the doublets in the contaminated
data indeed led to spurious branches that did not exist in the in-
ferred trajectories from the clean data. Except for doubletCells,
all the doublet-detection methods effectively removed doublets
such that spurious branches no longer existed in the inferred cell
trajectories. In particular, in the second task of inferring a
conjunction of three sequential trajectories (Figure 3B), Scrublet,
DoubletDetection, and DoubletFinder led to inferred trajectories
that most resembled the trajectory inferred from the clean data.
Figures 3 A and 3B also show that DoubletDetection and Dou-
bletFinder are the best two methods for removing the ‘‘outlier’’
doublets whose gene expression proﬁles do not resemble those
of any singlets.
Following cell trajectory inference, a typical next step is to
explore gene expression dynamics along the inferred trajectory
doublets in the simulated dataset. The true cell topology is a single lineage. For negative and positive controls, we included the accuracy of tempora lly DE genes
identiﬁed from the contaminated data with 20% doublets and the clean data without doublets.
(D) We re-illustrate the results in (C) by showing the improved accuracy in each metric (precision, recall, and TNR) after removing detected doublets from the
contaminated data; the results on the clean data without doublets are shown as a positive control.
ll
Article
186 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 13]

and to identify temporally DE genes ( Luecken and Theis, 2019 ;
Saelens et al., 2019). Hence, the accuracy of cell trajectory infer-
ence largely determines the accuracy of temporally DE gene iden-
tiﬁcation. Beyond checking the inferred cell trajectories after
doublet removal, as shown in Figures 3A and 3B, we evaluated
the effects of doublet removal on the identiﬁcation of temporally
DE genes. We used Splatter to simulate a scRNA-seq dataset
with a single lineage and 250 temporally DE genes out of a total
of 750 genes ( STAR Methods ). We referred to this dataset as
the ‘‘clean data.’’ We then mixed the data with randomly forming
doublets by targeting a 20% doublet rate, and the resulting data-
set was referred to as the ‘‘contaminated data.’’ Next, we used
eight doublet-detection methods to remove 20% droplets (with
the highest doublet scores assigned by each method) from the
contaminated data. Finally, we employed a general additive model
(GAM) ( Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990 ) to regress each gene’s
expression levels on the corresponding cell/droplet pseudotime
inferred by Slingshot or TSCAN ( Ji and Ji, 2016 ) on the clean
data, the contaminated data, and the dataset after each
doublet-detection method was applied. Note that we replaced
MST by TSCAN because MST does not output pseudotime values
for droplets and TSCAN is built upon the MST algorithm.
The temporally DE gene analysis result was summarized in
three accuracy measures: precision, recall, and TNR, all of which
were calculated under the Bonferroni-corrected p value
threshold of 0.05. Again, we used the accuracy obtained from
the clean data and the contaminated data as the positive and
negative controls, respectively. Doublet removal made a more
signiﬁcant improvement on the identiﬁcation of temporally DE
genes when Slingshot was used for trajectory inference ( Figures
3C and 3D). With Slingshot, all the eight doublet-detection
methods except doubletCells successfully restored the preci-
sion, recall, and TNR from low values on the contaminated
data to values as high as those on the clean data. With TSCAN,
however, the restoration effects were only obvious in precision
and TNR by Solo and cxds. In summary, doublet removal is
beneﬁcial for cell trajectory inference and the subsequent identi-
ﬁcation of temporally DE genes, and we observed strong bene-
ﬁcial effects when Slingshot was used for trajectory inference.
Performance of Doublet-Detection Methods under
Distributed Computing
A grand challenge in single-cell data sciences is the skyrocketing
demand for computational and storage resources due to the
rapidly increasing data sizes ( L€ahnemann et al., 2020 ). For
example, a scRNA-seq dataset may contain up to millions of
droplets, each of which has expression levels of tens of thou-
sands of genes (Regev et al., 2017). Analyzing such huge datasets
is often beyond the capacity of a single computer but requires
distributed computing, which analyzes data subsets in parallel.
Speciﬁc to the doublet-detection task, distributed computing
means that droplets are divided into batches, one batch per com-
puter node; then a doublet-detection method would be applied in
parallel to all batches, and it would assign doublet scores to drop-
lets in each batch. After this parallelization step, doublet scores
would be pooled from multiple batches, and a threshold would
be set on the pooled doublet scores to detect doublets.
Compared with the centralized computing that uses all the drop-
lets together, distributed computing may have deteriorated
doublet-detection accuracy due to the limited data information
within each droplet batch. Hence, how a doublet-detection
method performs under distributed computing is an important
evaluation criterion for the scalability and ﬂexibility of the method.
To investigate the performance of doublet-detection methods
under distributed computing, we randomly divided two large real
scRNA-seq datasets—pbmc-ch and pbmc-2ctrl-dm—into a
varying number of batches with equal numbers of droplets,
and we evaluated how the doublet-detection accuracy of each
method changed with the number of batches. It is expected
that the more the batches, the worse the accuracy, and our re-
sults conﬁrmed this. Figures 4 A and 4B show the AUPRC and
AUROC values of each method under each number of batches,
which varied from one to ten. The AUPRC and AUROC values
were calculated based on the pooled doublet scores as
described above. We excluded DoubletDecon from this compar-
ison, because it failed to run for most numbers of batches, again
suggesting its software implementation issue ( Github, 2020 ).
With only one batch, distributed computing is reduced to
centralized computing, and the corresponding accuracy is sup-
posedly the performance ceiling of every method. As expected,
most doublet-detection methods had decreasing accuracy,
which is clearer in AUPRC ( Figure 4A) than AUROC ( Figure 4B),
as the number of batches increased. Among the eight methods,
doubletCells was an underperforming outlier with the lowest
overall accuracy. DoubletDetection and Solo were among the
top-performing methods under centralized computing; however,
they exhibited the largest accuracy decrease under distributed
computing. In contrast, DoubletFinder was consistently a top
performer, demonstrating its superior accuracy again and its
robustness under distributed computing.
Computational Efﬁciency, Scalability, Stability, and
Software Implementation of Doublet-Detection
Methods
In addition to the above evaluation that focused on the effects of
doublet removal on various scRNA-seq data analyses, we
also compared doublet-detection methods in four computa-
tional aspects: efﬁciency, scalability, stability, and software
implementation.
First, we summarized the running time of the nine doublet-
detection methods (including their required data preprocessing
steps; STAR Methods) on the 16 real scRNA-seq datasets in
Ta-
ble S1 . Figure 4 C shows that cxds is the fastest method, while
Solo, DoubletDecon, DoubletDetection, and DoubletFinder are
signiﬁcantly slower than the other methods. Figure 4 D shows
that there was no straightforward relationship between the
mean AUPRC and the mean running time of eight doublet-detec-
tion methods (with the mean calculated across the 16 real data-
sets). Nevertheless, the three most computationally intensive
methods—Solo, DoubletDetection, and DoubletFinder—had
better accuracy than the other methods except hybrid did. Inter-
estingly, the hybrid method, an ensemble of cxds and bcds,
largely improved on both base methods without much running
time increase. Among all methods, DoubletFinder achieved the
highest mean AUPRC, while not being the most computationally
intensive method. Normalizing the mean running time by the
mean AUPRC value for every method, we found cxds as the
most resource-efﬁcient method ( Table S10).
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 187


[PDF_PAGE 14]

Second, we examined the scalability of doublet-detection
methods by how fast their running time increases as the number
of droplets grows. We used scDesign to generate 25 synthetic
scRNA-seq datasets with the number of droplets ranging from
400 to 10,000 ( STAR Methods). Then we applied each doublet-
detection method to these datasets and recorded its running
time (DoubletDecon was excluded, because it failed to run on
most synthetic data.) As shown in Figure 4E, all methods except
E
F
CD
AB
Figure 4. Comparison of Doublet-Detection Methods in Terms of Distributed Computing, Running Time, Scalability, and Stability
(A and B) Distributed computing performance of each method on two real datasets pbmc-ch and pmc-2ctrl-dm. We ﬁrst divided the original datasets into v arying
numbers of batches with equal sizes; then we applied each method to individual batches separately to identify and remove doublets; ﬁnally, we pooled b atches
together to assess the detection accuracy (AUPRC and AUROC values) of each method. The legend on the right applies to both panels (A) and (B).
(C) Distribution of running time in (natural log) seconds of each method across 16 real datasets.
(D) Mean AUPRC versus mean running time (across 16 real datasets) of eight doublet-detection methods.
(E) Scalability of each method. We calculated the relationship between running time and droplet number for each method on simulated datasets with var ying
droplet numbers.
(F) Stability of each method. We generated 20 datasets by randomly subsampling 90% droplets and 90% genes from the real datasets pbmc-ch and pbmc-2ctr l-
dm, and we applied each method to all the subsampled datasets. For each real dataset, the distribution of AUPRC values of each method across subsamplin gi s
shown, with 25% quantiles connected. We use the variance of the distribution to measure the stability of each method.
ll
Article
188 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 15]

Solo had running time scaled linearly with the number of drop-
lets. The reason that Solo exhibited an erratic relationship be-
tween its running time and the number of droplets is probably
due to its neural-network design. Among the other seven
methods, cxds and DoubletDetection demonstrated the best
and worst scalability, respectively.
Third, we evaluated doublet-detection methods in terms of the
statistical stability, i.e., how much their AUPRC and AUROC
values varied across subsets of droplets and genes. The smaller
the variation, the larger the statistical stability. We randomly down-
sampled two large real scRNA-seq datasets—pbmc-ch and
pbmc-2ctrl-dm—into 20 data subsets with 90% droplets and
90% genes. Then we applied each doublet-detection method to
these data subsets and recorded the resulting AUPRC and
AUROC values (DoubletDecon was excluded, because we were
unable to calculate its AUPRC and AUROC values, as explained
before.) Figures 4 Fa n d S2C show the distributions of AUPRC
and AUROC values of each method when applied to the subsets
generated from each original dataset. Interestingly, we observed a
roughly inverse relationship between the overall doublet-detection
accuracy and the statistical stability. For example, DoubletFinder
had the best overall accuracy in terms of both AUPRC and
AUROC, yet, its variation across data subsets was much greater
than that of Scrublet, which had a much lower overall accuracy.
Despite its suboptimal stability, we still found DoubletFinder as
a top performer if we compare the lower-quartile accuracy (i.e.,
the 25th percentile of AUPRC and AUROC values) of these
methods. To summarize, even though statistical stability is an
important criterion, in practice, it is often overruled by the overall
accuracy reﬂected by the mean, median, or lower-quartile accu-
racy value. In terms of the overall accuracy, we found Doublet-
Finder, Solo, and hybrid as the top three methods.
Fourth, we evaluated the software implementation of doublet-
detection methods, because user-friendliness, software quality,
and active maintenance are crucial to the success of bioinfor-
matics tools ( Mangul et al., 2019 ). We scored each method in
four aspects: software quality, execution convenience, publica-
tion, and documentation and support ( STAR Methods ). Table 2
lists our score reasoning and the overall usability score of each
method. In particular, DoubletDetection and DoubletDecon did
not successfully run on one or more datasets. Regarding user
support, Solo, DoubletDetection, DoubletFinder, and Double-
tDecon have active Q&As on their software webpages for col-
lecting users’ feedback and answering users’ questions. Among
the nine methods, DoubletFinder achieved the highest usability
score thanks to its excellent implementation.
DISCUSSION
With the rapid development of scRNA-seq technologies, a sky-
rocketing number of computational methods have been devel-
oped for various scRNA-seq data analyses ( Zappia et al.,
2018). For example, since 2018, more than 45 imputation
methods have already been developed to recover missing
gene expression (commonly referred to as ‘‘dropouts’’) in
scRNA-seq data ( Li and Li, 2018 ; Lopez et al., 2018 ; Risso
et al., 2018 ; van Dijk et al., 2018 ; L€ahnemann et al., 2020 ).
Such richness of computational methods is a double-sided
blade. On the one hand, scRNA-seq researchers have more
blocks to build analysis pipelines that accommodate their scien-
tiﬁc investigation needs; on the other hand, it becomes increas-
ingly difﬁcult for researchers to choose the method, from dozens
of methods developed for the same purpose, that best ﬁts each
step of their pipeline. Unlike in experimental sciences where new
technologies often replace old ones, there are usually no clear-
cut or universal choices of computational methods. An appro-
priate choice of computational method is case by case, depend-
ing on data characteristics and scientiﬁc questions at hand.
Inappropriate method choices would, to varying extents, bias
data analysis (such as by introducing artiﬁcial, non-biological
signals) and ultimately lead to false discoveries ( Andrews and
Hemberg, 2018 ; Weber et al., 2019 ). To avoid this issue, the
scRNA-seq ﬁeld and the broad biomedical science community
yearn for comprehensive benchmark studies that independently
and fairly evaluate computational methods ( L€ahnemann et al.,
2020). A well-designed benchmark study should offer users
objective, accurate, and informative guidance on selecting the
appropriate method(s) for a speciﬁc analysis task.
To provide the ﬁrst, comprehensive benchmark of computa-
tional doublet-detection methods, in this study, we evaluated
nine existing methods using 16 real and 112 synthetic scRNA-
seq datasets from three perspectives: overall detection accu-
racy, impacts on downstream analyses, and computational efﬁ-
ciency. We further categorized our benchmark results in nine as-
pects, including four related to doublet-detection accuracy and
ﬁve associated with software implementation ( Figure 5 , which
does not include DoubletDecon because it failed to run in most
evaluations). In summary, DoubletFinder was the best method
in terms of accuracy, yet, its computational efﬁciency and stabil-
ity were not among the best. The cxds method was the opposite:
It had the best computational efﬁciency, excellent stability, but
medium accuracy. Our summary is consistent with the afore-
mentioned principle of computational methods that no method
is universally the best, so a fair comparison of computational
methods should be multifaceted.
Although our benchmark study has collected all the available
scRNA-seq datasets to date that contain doublet annotations,
we note that none of the annotations is utterly accurate due
to experimental limitations. For example, the two species-
mixture datasets, hm-12k and hm-6k, only labeled the hetero-
typic doublets formed by a human cell and a mouse cell; the six
demuxlet datasets only labeled the doublets formed by cells of
two individuals; many homotypic doublets were unlabeled in all
these datasets. As a result, the incompleteness of doublet an-
notations would have inﬂated the false negative rates and
reduced the precision of computational doublet-detection
methods in our benchmark. To overcome this limitation, we de-
signed extensive simulations to benchmark computational
doublet-detection methods in a fair and comprehensive
manner. Yet, how to generate accurate doublet annotations
by experimental techniques remains an open question to
experimental scientists.
Regarding the future development and benchmark of compu-
tational doublet-detection methods, here we list ﬁve open ques-
tions we deem important for computational scientists:
(1) How to estimate the unknown doublet rate in a scRNA-
seq dataset? Some methods provide heuristic guidance
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 189


[PDF_PAGE 16]

to estimate the doublet rates or select the threshold on
doublet scores. For example, DoubletFinder suggests
using the rates of heterotypic doublets and Poisson
doublet formation as the respective lower and upper
bounds of the expected doublet rate ( Bloom, 2018 ;
McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b); Scrublet recommends
setting the doublet-score threshold in the middle of the
two modes, which it expects to appear, in the doublet-
score distribution ( Wolock et al., 2019 ); Solo sets the
doublet-score threshold to 0.5 by default ( Bernstein
et al., 2020 ). However, there lacks consensus or direct
estimation of the doublet rate from scRNA-seq data. To
address this issue, we suggest estimating the null distri-
bution of doublet scores (of singlets) as a preceding
step; with a reliable null distribution estimate, estimating
the doublet rate would then become feasible ( Efron and
Hastie, 2016).
(2) How to distinguish homotypic doublets from singlets?
Existing computational doublet-detection methods
cannot well identify the homotypic doublets that have
similar transcriptome proﬁles to those of singlets, likely
due to the ways they generate artiﬁcial doublets ( Lun
et al., 2016 ; Gayoso and Shor, 2018 ; Bais and Kostka,
2020; DePasquale et al., 2019 ; McGinnis et al., 2019a ,
2019b; Wolock et al., 2019 ; Bernstein et al., 2020 ). A
possible direction is to extract and incorporate features
that can distinguish homotypic doublets from singlets,
such as the droplet library size.
(3) How to distinguish doublets from droplets contaminated by
ambient mRNA? Ambient mRNA molecules are released
from lysed cells into the cell suspension; they may enter
droplets and contaminate the measured transcriptome pro-
ﬁles of those droplets. Similar to doublets, contaminated
droplets by ambient mRNA also confound scRNA-seq
data analysis (Luecken and Theis, 2019). Existing computa-
tional doublet-detection methods do not distinguish these
two types of non-singlet droplets; instead, computational
methods have been developed separately to detect
contaminated droplets ( Yang et al., 2020 ; Young and
Behjati, 2020). Ideally, the single-cell ﬁeld desires a compu-
tational method that can simultaneously remove all non-
singlet droplets, including doublets, contaminated
droplets, and empty droplets, from scRNA-seq data.
(4) How to improve doublet-detection algorithms regarding
the use of artiﬁcial doublets? The majority of existing
computational methods tackle the doublet-detection
task as a binary classiﬁcation problem ( Table 1 ). To
train a classiﬁcation algorithm, they use original drop-
lets in data and artiﬁcial doublets they simulate to
represent ‘‘singlets’’ and ‘‘doublets,’’ respectively.
However, not all original droplets are singlets, because
otherwise we would not need doublet detection. By
neglecting differences between original droplets and
singlets, existing methods do not supply their classiﬁ-
cation algorithms with quality training data, and a likely
consequence is that their post-training classiﬁers would
Table 2. Usability of the Nine Doublet-Detection Methods
Software Quality Execution Convenience Publication
Documentation &
Support
Usability
Score
doubletCells excellent (success
on all datasets)
excellent (R package) good (published as
a part of a research
paper in a peer-reviewed journal)
good (documentation,
custom webpage,
but no Q&A)
6
Scrublet excellent (Python module) excellent (published as
an independent research
paper in a peer-reviewed journal)
good (documentation,
GitHub webpage, but
no Q&A)
7
cxds excellent (R package) 7
bcds 7
Hybrid 7
Solo good (Linux command-
line with a stringent
requirement on input
data format: loom/hd5)
excellent (published
as an independent
research paper in a
peer-reviewed journal)
excellent (documentation,
GitHub webpage, and
active Q&A)
7
DoubletDetection good
(failure on one
real dataset)
excellent (Python module) fair (GitHub webpage,
manuscript with
algorithm description)
5
DoubletFinder excellent (success
on all datasets)
excellent (R package) excellent (published as
an independent research
paper in a peer-reviewed
journal)
8
DoubletDecon fair (failure on four
real datasets and the
majority of synthetic
datasets)
excellent (R package) excellent (published as
an independent
research paper in a
peer-reviewed journal)
excellent (documentation,
GitHub webpage, and
active Q&A)
6
We measured the usability of each method in four aspects: software quality, execution convenience, publication, and documentation and support.
Each aspect has three levels: excellent, good, and fair, which correspond to scores 2, 1, and 0, respectively. The usability score of a method is the
sum of its four scores under the four aspects.
ll
Article
190 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 17]

be biased ( Nettleton et al., 2010 ), and thus, miss a sub-
stantial number of doublets among original droplets. A
possible remedy for this drawback is to ﬁlter out the
likely doublets from the original droplets, e.g., by
applying outlier detection methods ( Domingues et al.,
2018), before simulating artiﬁcial doublets and subse-
quently training a classiﬁcation algorithm. An alternative
remedy is to keep the training data but train a classiﬁ-
cation algorithm under the ‘‘learning with noise labels’’
machine-learning framework ( Nettleton et al., 2010 ; Na-
tarajan et al., 2013 ). Moreover, there are possible im-
provements to be made in the generation of artiﬁcial
doublets. Instead of simply adding or averaging the
gene expression proﬁles of two random droplets as
done in existing methods, ﬁner adjustments can be
made to the mixing of two droplets so as to generate
more realistic artiﬁcial doublets.
(5) How to ensemble doublet-detection methods? As a multi-
faceted problem, doublet detection can hardly be solved
by one single computational method. This is due to the di-
versity of scRNA-seq datasets. The success of the
method hybrid, an ensemble of two methods bcds and
cxds, motivated us to think that ensembling reasonable
and complementary methods, a technique widely used
in machine learning ( Dietterich, 2000 ; Hastie et al.,
2009), may boost the accuracy of doublet detection. Ta-
bles S12 and S13 show the pairwise similarities of
doublet-detection methods in terms of their doublet
scores and identiﬁed doublets in the 16 real datasets.
Seeing that the top-performing methods exhibited notice-
able differences, we expect that there is room for using
the ensemble technique to develop a more accurate
doublet-detection method (see further discussion in the
STAR Methods).
By dissecting existing doublet-detection methods, we found
method performance highly dependent on the values of hyper-
parameters (also known as tuni ng parameters), if any. For
example, DoubletFinder, Scrublet, and doubletCells all use
the kNN algorithm to distinguish doublets from singlets; howev-
er, surprisingly, DoubletFinder outperformed the other two
methods in most of our comparisons. A probable reason is
that DoubletFinder optimizes several key hyperparameters of
the kNN algorithm in a reasonable and data-driven way. For
example, DoubletFinder selects the number of nearest neigh-
bors k by maximizing the bimodality of the doublet score distri-
bution. This advantage makes DoubletFinder adaptable to
scRNA-seq datasets with distinct characteristics ( Lun et al.,
2016; McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b; Wolock et al., 2019 ). In
contrast, Scrublet and doubletC ells each assign a ﬁxed default
value to k, restricting their ﬂexibility and generalizability ( Lun
et al., 2016 ; McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b; Wolock et al.,
2019) (see further discussion in the STAR Methods ). The choice
of hyperparameter values is especially important for methods
built upon complex algorithms. For example, bcds uses the
gradient boosting algorithm ( Bais and Kostka, 2020 ), a leading
classiﬁcation algorithm that has more hyperparameters than
the simple kNN algorithm does ( Chen and Guestrin, 2016 );
however, the additional complexity did not make bcds
outperform DoubletFinder, probably due to the lack of hyper-
parameter optimization. This phenomenon emphasizes the
importance for bioinformatics tools to optimize hyperparameter
values in a scientiﬁc, data-driven way ( Feurer and Hutter, 2019 ;
Waring et al., 2020 ).
Ideally, doublet removal requires both experimental tech-
niques and computational methods. If permitted, researchers
may use an experimental technique and a computational
method sequentially. That is, they ﬁrst use an experimental tech-
nique, such as multiplexing, to ﬁlter out obvious doublets (e.g.,
Figure 5. A Graphical Summary of Benchmark Results
The four aspects related to doublet-detection accuracy are marked in blue, while the other ﬁve aspects related to software implementation are marked in black.
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 191


[PDF_PAGE 18]

the doublets formed by cells of different samples) and then apply
a computational method to further screening for the remaining
droplets that are likely doublets. Or they may combine the
doublet scores assigned to each droplet by an experimental
technique and a computational method, as proposed by the
method Solo. This second approach requires the experimental
technique to have a doublet scoring system ( Bernstein
et al., 2020 ).
In summary, computational doublet detection is critical for the
quality control of scRNA-seq data analysis ( Luecken and Theis,
2019). Our study is a comprehensive benchmark of currently
available doublet-detection methods under a wide variety of bio-
logical and technical settings. Our study provides much-needed
guidance to researchers in choosing appropriate doublet-detec-
tion methods for scRNA-seq data analysis. Our results also point
out directions for further methodological development and
improvement in computational doublet detection, an active
area of bioinformatics research ( Pierre-Luc, 2020).
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLES
d RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
B Lead Contact
B Materials Availability
B Data and Code Availability
d METHOD DETAILS
B Real Data Preprocessing
B Benchmark Environment and Parameter Settings
B Measures of Doublet-Detection Accuracy
B Simulation of scRNA-seq Datasets Containing
Doublets
B Experimental Settings Used in Benchmarking Simu-
lations
B DE Gene Analysis
B Identiﬁcation of Highly Variable Genes
B Cell Clustering Analysis
B Cell Trajectory Inference
B Distributed Computing
B Scalability, Stability, and Usability
B Accuracy of Computational Doublet Detection in Rela-
tion to Experimental Techniques for Doublet Labeling
B Pairwise Similarities of Computational Doublet-Detec-
tion Methods
B Comparison of Hyperparameter Selection in kNN-
Base Methods
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cels.2020.11.008.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Bo Li at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
(https://www.lilab-utsw.org/research) for bringing our attention to the
doublet-detection problem. We also appreciate the comments and feedback
from our group members in the Junction of Statistics and Biology at UCLA
(http://jsb.ucla.edu). This work was supported by NIH/NIGMS
R01GM120507, NSF DBI-1846216, Sloan Research Fellowship, Johnson &
Johnson WiSTEM2D Award, and UCLA DGSOM W.M. Keck Foundation Junior
Faculty Award. MSC 2010 subject classiﬁcations: 62H20
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
N.M.X. and J.J.L. conceived the idea. N.M.X. conducted the bioinformatics
analysis and wrote the paper. J.J.L. thoroughly reviewed and edited the paper.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: June 28, 2020
Revised: October 6, 2020
Accepted: November 19, 2020
Published: December 17, 2020
REFERENCES
Allaire, J.J., et al. (2018). Reticulate: interface to Python. R Package Version 1.
https://rstudio.github.io/reticulate/.
Amezquita, R.A., Lun, A.T.L., Becht, E., Carey, V.J., Carpp, L.N., Geistlinger,
L., Marini, F., Rue-Albrecht, K., Risso, D., Soneson, C., et al. (2020).
Orchestrating single-cell analysis with Bioconductor. Nat. Methods 17,
137–145, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0654-x.
Andrews, T.S., and Hemberg, M. (2018). False signals induced by single-cell
imputation. F1000Res 7, 1740, https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.
16613.2.
Bais, A.S., and Kostka, D. (2020). scds: computational annotation of doublets
in single-cell RNA sequencing data. Bioinformatics 36, 1150–1158, https://doi.
org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btz698.
Bernstein, N.J., Fong, N.L., Lam, I., Roy, M.A., Hendrickson, D.G., and Kelley,
D.R. (2020). Solo: doublet identiﬁcation in single-cell RNA-Seq via semi-super-
vised deep learning. Cell Syst. 11, 95–101.e5.
Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J., Lambiotte, R., and Lefebvre, E. (2008). Fast un-
folding of communities in large networks. J. Stat. Mech. 2008, 10008,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008.
Bloom, J.D. (2018). Estimating the frequency of multiplets in single-cell RNA
sequencing from cell-mixing experiments. PeerJ 6, e5578.
Branco, P., Torgo, L., and Ribeiro, R.P. (2016). A survey of predictive modeling
on imbalanced domains. ACM Comput. Surv. 49, 1–50, https://doi.org/10.
1145/2907070.
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E., and Satija, R. (2018).
Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across different conditions, technol-
ogies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420.
Chen, G., Ning, B., and Shi, T. (2019). Single-cell RNA-Seq technologies and
related computational data analysis. Front. Genet. 10, 317.
Chen, T., and Guestrin, C. (2016). XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting system. In
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 785–794.
DePasquale, E.A.K., Schnell, D.J., Van Camp, P.J., Valiente-Alandı´, I´ ., Blaxall,
B.C., Grimes, H.L., Singh, H., and Salomonis, N. (2019). DoubletDecon: de-
convoluting doublets from single-cell RNA-sequencing data. Cell Rep. 29,
1718–1727.e8.
Dietterich, T.G. (2000). Ensemble methods in machine learning. In Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (Springer), pp. 1–15.
Domingues, R., Filippone, M., Michiardi, P., and Zouaoui, J. (2018). A compar-
ative evaluation of outlier detection algorithms: experiments and analyses.
Pattern Recognit. 74, 406–421.
Duo` , A., Robinson, M.D., and Soneson, C. (2018). A systematic performance
evaluation of clustering methods for single-cell RNA-seq data. F1000Res
7, 1141.
ll
Article
192 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 19]

Durinck, S., Spellman, P.T., Birney, E., and Huber, W. (2009). Mapping identi-
ﬁers for the integration of genomic datasets with the R/Bioconductor package
biomaRt. Nat. Protoc. 4, 1184–1191.
Edgar, R., Domrachev, M., and Lash, A.E. (2002). Gene Expression Omnibus:
NCBI gene expression and hybridization array data repository. Nucleic Acids
Res. 30, 207–210.
Efron, B., and Hastie, T. (2016). Computer Age Statistical Inference
(Cambridge University Press).
Ester, M., Kriegel, H.-P., Sander, J., and Xiaowei, X. (1996). A density-based
algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise.
KDD’96: Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 226–231.
Fay, M.P., and Proschan, M.A. (2010). Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney or t-test? On
assumptions for hypothesis tests and multiple interpretations of decision rules.
Stat. Surv. 4, 1–39.
Feng, C., Liu, S., Zhang, H., Guan, R., Li, D., Zhou, F., Liang, Y., and Feng, X.
(2020). Dimension reduction and clustering models for single-cell RNA
sequencing data: a comparative study. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms21062181.
Feurer, M., and Hutter, F. (2019). Hyperparameter optimization. In Automated
Machine Learning: Methods, Systems, Challenges, F. Hutter, L. Kotthoff, and
J. Vanschoren, eds. (Springer International Publishing), pp. 3–33.
Finak, G., McDavid, A., Yajima, M., Deng, J., Gersuk, V., Shalek, A.K., Slichter,
C.K., Miller, H.W., McElrath, M.J., Prlic, M., et al. (2015). MAST: a ﬂexible sta-
tistical framework for assessing transcriptional changes and characterizing
heterogeneity in single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol. 16, 278.
Gayoso, A., and Shor, J. (2018). DoubletDetection (Zenodo). https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.2678042.
Github. (2020). DoubletDecon. https://github.com/EDePasquale/Doublet
Decon/issues.
Gong, T., and Szustakowski, J.D. (2013). DeconRNASeq: a statistical frame-
work for deconvolution of heterogeneous tissue samples based on mRNA-
Seq data. Bioinformatics 29, 1083–1085.
Grau, J., Grosse, I., and Keilwagen, J. (2015). PRROC: computing and visual-
izing precision-recall and receiver operating characteristic curves in R.
Bioinformatics 31, 2595–2597.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J. (2009). The Elements of Statistical
Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, Second Edition (Springer
Science and Business Media).
Hastie, T.J., and Tibshirani, R.J. (1990). Generalized Additive Models
(CRC Press).
Herring, C.A., Chen, B., McKinley, E.T., and Lau, K.S. (2018). Single-cell
computational strategies for lineage reconstruction in tissue systems. Cell.
Mol. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 5, 539–548.
Hwang, B., Lee, J.H., and Bang, D. (2018). Single-cell RNA sequencing tech-
nologies and bioinformatics pipelines. Exp. Mol. Med. 50, 96.
Ji, Z., and Ji, H. (2016). TSCAN: pseudo-time reconstruction and evaluation in
single-cell RNA-seq analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, e117.
Kang, H.M., Subramaniam, M., Targ, S., Nguyen, M., Maliskova, L., McCarthy,
E., Wan, E., Wong, S., Byrnes, L., Lanata, C.M., et al. (2018). Multiplexed
droplet single-cell RNA-sequencing using natural genetic variation. Nat.
Biotechnol. 36, 89–94.
Kolodziejczyk, A.A., Kim, J.K., Svensson, V., Marioni, J.C., and Teichmann,
S.A. (2015). The technology and biology of single-cell RNA sequencing. Mol.
Cell 58, 610–620.
L€ahnemann, D., Ko ¨ ster, J., Szczurek, E., McCarthy, D.J., Hicks, S.C.,
Robinson, M.D., Vallejos, C.A., Campbell, K.R., Beerenwinkel, N., Mahfouz,
A., et al. (2020). Eleven grand challenges in single-cell data science.
Genome Biol. 21, 31.
Li, W.V., and Li, J.J. (2018). An accurate and robust imputation method
scImpute for single-cell RNA-seq data. Nat. Commun. 9, 997.
Li, W.V., and Li, J.J. (2019). A statistical simulator scDesign for rational scRNA-
seq experimental design. Bioinformatics 35, i41–i50.
Liu, S., and Trapnell, C. (2016). Single-cell transcriptome sequencing: recent
advances and remaining challenges. F1000Res 5, https://doi.org/10.12688/
f1000research.7223.1.
Lopez, R., Regier, J., Cole, M.B., Jordan, M.I., and Yosef, N. (2018). Deep
generative modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nat. Methods 15,
1053–1058.
Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550.
Luecken, M.D., and Theis, F.J. (2019). Current best practices in single-cell
RNA-seq analysis: a tutorial. Mol. Syst. Biol. 15, e8746.
Lun, A.T.L., McCarthy, D.J., and Marioni, J.C. (2016). A step-by-step workﬂow
for low-level analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data with Bioconductor.
F1000Res 5, 2122, https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.9501.2.
Mangul, S., Martin, L.S., Eskin, E., and Blekhman, R. (2019). Improving the us-
ability and archival stability of bioinformatics software. Genome Biol. 20, 47.
McGinnis, C.S., Murrow, L.M., and Gartner, Z.J. (2019a). DoubletFinder:
doublet detection in single-cell RNA sequencing data using artiﬁcial nearest
neighbors. Cell Syst. 8, 329–337.e4.
McGinnis, C.S., Patterson, D.M., Winkler, J., Conrad, D.N., Hein, M.Y.,
Srivastava, V., Hu, J.L., Murrow, L.M., Weissman, J.S., Werb, Z., et al.
(2019b). Multi-seq: sample multiplexing for single-cell RNA sequencing using
lipid-tagged indices. Nat. Methods 16, 619–626, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41592-019-0433-8.
Natarajan, N., et al. (2013). Learning with noisy labels. In Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. 26, C.J.C. Burges, et al., eds. (Curran Associates, Inc.),
pp. 1196–1204.
Nettleton, D.F., Orriols-Puig, A., and Fornells, A. (2010). A study of the effect of
different types of noise on the precision of supervised learning techniques.
Artif. Intell. Rev. 33, 275–306.
Pﬁster, R., Schwarz, K.A., Janczyk, M., Dale, R., and Freeman, J.B. (2013).
Good things peak in pairs: a note on the bimodality coefﬁcient. Front.
Psychol. 4, 700.
Pierre-Luc. (2020). scDblFinder. (GitHub). https://github.com/plger/
scDblFinder.
Regev, A., Teichmann, S.A., Lander, E.S., Amit, I., Benoist, C., Birney, E.,
Bodenmiller, B., Campbell, P., Carninci, P., Clatworthy, M., et al. (2017). The
human cell atlas. eLife 6, e27041.
Risso, D., Perraudeau, F., Gribkova, S., Dudoit, S., and Vert, J.P. (2018). A gen-
eral and ﬂexible method for signal extraction from single-cell RNA-seq data.
Nat. Commun. 9, 284.
Saelens, W., Cannoodt, R., Todorov, H., Saeys, Y., et al. (2019). A comparison
of single-cell trajectory inference methods: towards more accurate and robust
tools. bioRXiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/276907.
Saito, T., and Rehmsmeier, M. (2015). The precision-recall plot is more infor-
mative than the ROC plot when evaluating binary classiﬁers on imbalanced da-
tasets. PLoS One 10, e0118432.
Saliba, A.E., Westermann, A.J., Gorski, S.A., and Vogel, J. (2014). Single-cell
RNA-seq: advances and future challenges. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 8845–
8860, https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku555.
Stoeckius, M., Zheng, S., Houck-Loomis, B., Hao, S., Yeung, B.Z., Mauck,
W.M., Smibert, P., and Satija, R. (2018). Cell Hashing with barcoded antibodies
enables multiplexing and doublet detection for single cell genomics. Genome
Biol. 19, 224.
Street, K., Risso, D., Fletcher, R.B., Das, D., Ngai, J., Yosef, N., Purdom, E.,
and Dudoit, S. (2018). Slingshot: cell lineage and pseudotime inference for sin-
gle-cell transcriptomics. BMC Genomics 19, 477, https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12864-018-4772-0.
Stuart, T., Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Hafemeister, C., Papalexi, E., Mauck, W.M.,
Hao, Y., Stoeckius, M., Smibert, P., and Satija, R. (2019). Comprehensive inte-
gration of single-cell data. Cell 177, 1888–1902.e21.
Tian, L., Dong, X., Freytag, S., Le ˆ Cao, K.A., Su, S., JalalAbadi, A., Amann-
Zalcenstein, D., Weber, T.S., Seidi, A., Jabbari, J.S., et al. (2019).
Benchmarking single cell RNA-sequencing analysis pipelines using mixture
control experiments. Nat. Methods 16, 479–487.
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021 193


[PDF_PAGE 20]

Trapnell, C., Cacchiarelli, D., Grimsby, J., Pokharel, P., Li, S., Morse, M.,
Lennon, N.J., Livak, K.J., Mikkelsen, T.S., and Rinn, J.L. (2014). The dynamics
and regulators of cell fate decisions are revealed by pseudotemporal ordering
of single cells. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 381–386.
Vallejos, C.A., Marioni, J.C., and Richardson, S. (2015). BASiCS: bayesian
analysis of single-cell sequencing data. PLoS Comp. Biol. 11, e1004333.
van Dijk, D., Sharma, R., Nainys, J., Yim, K., Kathail, P., Carr, A.J., Burdziak, C.,
Moon, K.R., Chaffer, C.L., Pattabiraman, D., et al. (2018). Recovering gene in-
teractions from single-cell data using data diffusion. Cell 174, 716–729.e27,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.05.061.
Wang, T., Li, B., Nelson, C.E., and Nabavi, S. (2019). Comparative analysis of
differential gene expression analysis tools for single-cell RNA sequencing
data. BMC Bioinformatics 20, 40.
Waring, J., Lindvall, C., and Umeton, R. (2020). Automated machine learning:
review of the state-of-the-art and opportunities for healthcare. Artif. Intell.
Med. 104, 101822.
Weber, L.M., Saelens, W., Cannoodt, R., Soneson, C., Hapfelmeier, A.,
Gardner, P.P., Boulesteix, A.L., Saeys, Y., and Robinson, M.D. (2019).
Essential guidelines for computational method benchmarking. Genome Biol.
20, 125.
Wolock, S.L., Lopez, R., and Klein, A.M. (2019). Scrublet: computational iden-
tiﬁcation of cell doublets in single-cell transcriptomic data. Cell Syst. 8,
281–291.e9.
Yang, S., Corbett, S.E., Koga, Y., Wang, Z., Johnson, W.E., Yajima, M., and
Campbell, J.D. (2020). Decontamination of ambient RNA in single-cell RNA-
seq with DecontX. Genome Biol. 21, 57, https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-
020-1950-6.
Yip, S.H., Sham, P.C., and Wang, J. (2019). Evaluation of tools for highly var-
iable gene discovery from single-cell RNA-seq data. Brief. Bioinform. 20,
1583–1589.
Young, M.D., and Behjati, S. (2020). SoupX removes ambient RNA contamina-
tion from droplet based single cell RNA sequencing data. bioRxiv https://www.
biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/303727v2.abstract.
Zappia, L., Phipson, B., and Oshlack, A. (2017). Splatter: simulation of single-
cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biol. 18, 174.
Zappia, L., Phipson, B., and Oshlack, A. (2018). Exploring the single-cell RNA-
seq analysis landscape with the scRNA-tools database. PLoS Comp. Biol. 14,
e1006245.
Zheng, G.X.Y., Terry, J.M., Belgrader, P., Ryvkin, P., Bent, Z.W., Wilson, R.,
Ziraldo, S.B., Wheeler, T.D., McDermott, G.P., Zhu, J., et al. (2017).
Massively parallel digital transcriptional proﬁling of single cells. Nat.
Commun. 8, 14049.
ll
Article
194 Cell Systems 12, 176–194, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 21]

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLES
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulﬁlled by the Lead Contact, Jingyi
Jessica Li ( jli@stat.ucla.edu).
Materials Availability
This study did not generate new materials.
Data and Code Availability
C The real and synthetic scRNA-seq datasets used in this study have been deposited at Zenodo repository and are publicly
available at https://zenodo.org/record/4062232#.X3YR9Hn0kuU%E3%80%82.
C The source code used in this study is publicly available at https://github.com/xnnba1984/Doublet-Detection-Benchmark.
C The scripts used to generate the ﬁgures reported in this paper are available at https://github.com/xnnba1984/Doublet-
Detection-Benchmark.
C Any additional information required to reproduce this work is available from the Lead Contact.
METHOD DETAILS
Real Data Preprocessing
Whenever preprocessed datasets were available, they were directly used in this study. Otherwise, datasets were preprocessed in the
same way as in the original studies in which they were generated. In every dataset, genes and droplets were removed if they had no
reads in any droplets and any genes, respectively. Below is the preprocessing detail for every dataset.
pbmc-ch (Stoeckius et al., 2018 ): human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from eight donors. Doublets were anno-
tated by cell hashing with CD45 as the hashing antibody. This dataset is available at https://www.dropbox.com/sh/
ntc33ium7cg1za1/AAD_8XIDmu4F7lJ-5sp-rGFYa?dl=0 in ﬁles pbmc_hto_mtx.rds and pbmc_umi_mtx.rds. Its preprocessing pipe-
line is available at
https://satijalab.org/seurat/v3.1/hashing_vignette.html, including an instruction about how to extract the doublet annotation.
REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER
Software and Algorithms
scDesign ( Li and Li, 2019 ) https://github.com/Vivianstats/scDesign
Seurat ( Butler et al., 2018 ;
Stuart et al., 2019 )
https://satijalab.org/seurat/
Splatter ( Zappia et al., 2017 ) https://github.com/Oshlack/splatter
biomaRt ( Durinck et al., 2009 ) https://github.com/grimbough/biomaRt
reticulate ( Allaire, 2018) https://github.com/rstudio/reticulate
PRROC ( Grau et al., 2015 ) https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/PRROC/index.html
proxy https://cran.r-project.org/
web/packages/proxy/proxy.pdf
https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/proxy/index.html
dbscan ( Ester et al., 1996 ) https://github.com/mhahsler/dbscan
Slingshot ( Street et al., 2018 ) https://github.com/kstreet13/slingshot
Computational doublet-
detection methods
Table 1 https://github.com/xnnba1984/Doublet-Detection-Benchmark
Benchmark of computational
doublet-detection methods
This paper https://github.com/xnnba1984/Doublet-Detection-Benchmark
Deposited Data
Real datasets Table S1 https://zenodo.org/record/4062232#.X6GordD0laQ
Simulation datasets This paper https://zenodo.org/record/4062232#.X6GordD0laQ
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194.e1–e6, February 17, 2021 e1


[PDF_PAGE 22]

cline-ch (Stoeckius et al., 2018 ): four human cell lines HEK, K562, KG1, and THP1. Doublets were annotated by cell hashing with
CD29 and CD45 as the hashing antibodies. The access URL and preprocessing pipeline of this dataset are the same as those of the
pbmc-ch dataset. The dataset is in ﬁles hto12_hto_mtx.rds and hto12_umi_mtx.rds.
Mkidney-ch (Bernstein et al., 2020 ): dissociated mouse kidney cells. Doublets were annotated by cell hashing with cholesterol
modiﬁed oligos (CMOs) as the hashing antibodies. The raw count matrix and doublet annotations were downloaded from the
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) ( Edgar et al., 2002 ) with the accession GSE140262.
hm-12k and hm-6k (Zheng et al., 2017): two mixtures of human HEK293T and mouse NIH3T3 cells with 12,000 and 6000 droplets
respectively. The raw count matrices were downloaded from
https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/hgmm_12k and https://support.10xgenomics.
com/single-cell-gene-expression/datasets/2.1.0/hgmm_6k
A droplet was annotated as a doublet if its barcode was associated with both human and mouse. Mouse genes were mapped into
their human orthologs using R package biomaRt (Durinck et al., 2009) (v 2.44.1). Then each pair of human and mouse count matrices
was concatenated into each of the two datasets.
pbmc-1A-dm, pbmc-1B-dm, and pbmc-1C-dm (Kang et al., 2018): three samples of PBMCs from systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) patients. Droplets were sequenced immediately after thawing. Doublets were annotated by demuxlet ( Kang et al., 2018 ). The
raw count matrix and doublet annotations were downloaded from the GEO with the accession GSE96583.
pbmc-2ctrl-dm and pbmc-2stiml-dm (Kang et al., 2018 ): two samples of PBMCs from SLE patients. Droplets were sequenced
after being cultured for six hours following thawing, with (pbmc-2stiml-dm) or without (pbmc-2ctrl-dm) IFN-beta stimulation. Dou-
blets were annotated by demuxlet. The raw count matrix and doublet annotations were downloaded from the GEO with the accession
GSE96583.
J293t-dm (Kang et al., 2018 ): a mixture of human Jurkat and HEK293T cell lines. Doublets were annotated by demuxlet. The raw
count matrix was downloaded from
https://ucsf.app.box.com/s/vg1bycvsjgyg63gkqsputprq5rxzjl6k/ﬁle/220975201845.
Doublet annotations were obtained from
https://ucsf.app.box.com/s/vg1bycvsjgyg63gkqsputprq5rxzjl6k/ﬁle/220974993609
pdx-MULTI (McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b): a mixture of human breast cancer cells and mouse immune cells from a patient-
derived xenograft (PDX) mouse model. Doublets were annotated by MULTI-seq ( McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b). The dataset was
downloaded from the GEO with the accession GSE129578. Doublet were annotated by following the data processing pipeline avail-
able at https://github.com/chris-mcginnis-ucsf/MULTI-seq.
HMEC-orig-MULTI and HMEC-rep-MULTI (McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b): human primary mammary epithelial cells (HMECs)
with HMEC-orig-MULTI as the original sample and HMEC-rep-MULTI as a technical replica. The GEO accession and preprocessing
pipeline of this dataset are the same as those of the pdx-MULTI dataset.
HEK-HMEC-MULTI (McGinnis et al., 2019a, 2019b): a mixture of human HEK293Ts and HMECs. The GEO accession and prepro-
cessing pipeline of this dataset are the same as those of the pdx-MULTI dataset.
nuc-MULTI (McGinnis et al., 2019a
, 2019b): a mixture of puriﬁed nuclei from human HEK293Ts, Jurkats, and mouse embryonic
ﬁbroblasts (MEFs). The GEO accession and preprocessing pipeline of this dataset are the same as those of the pdx-MULTI dataset.
Mouse genes were mapped into their human orthologs using R package biomaRt (v 2.44.1).
Benchmark Environment and Parameter Settings
All doublet-detection methods were executed on a server with two Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-2687W v4 CPUs, 256GB memory, and
Ubuntu 18.04 system. An Nvidia(R) Geforce(R) RTX 2080 Ti GPU was used to accelerate the execution of the Solo method as
suggested (Bernstein et al., 2020 ). The parameters of doublet-detection methods were set to their recommended values or default
values if no recommendation was available. The latest version of each method (by September 2020; Table 1 ) was used. Random
seeds were ﬁxed and saved in our code to ensure reproducibility. The detailed conﬁguration for each method is summa-
rized below.
doubletCells: The method was executed by following the instruction at
https://bioconductor.statistik.tu-dortmund.de/packages/3.8/workﬂows/vignettes/simpleSingleCell/inst/doc/work-6-
doublet.html.
Doublet scores were obtained from the dblCells function in R package scran (v 1.16.0) with parameters set to default.
Scrublet: R package reticulate (v 1.16) was used to execute the python module scrublet (v 0.2.1). The parameters were set by
following the instruction at
https://github.com/AllonKleinLab/scrublet/blob/master/examples/scrublet_basics.ipynb.
Doublet scores were obtained from the function Scrublet.scrub_doublets. cxds, bcds and hybrid: These three methods were
executed by following the instructions at https://github.com/kostkalab/scds.
Doublet scores were obtained from the functionscxds, bcds and cxds_bcds_hybrid in R package scds (v 1.2.0) with parameters set
to default.
DoubletDetection: R package reticulate (v 1.16) was used to execute the python module doubletdetection. The parameters were
set by following the instruction at
https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/JonathanShor/DoubletDetection/blob/master/tests/notebooks/PBMC_8k_vignette.ipynb.
ll
Article
e2 Cell Systems 12, 176–194.e1–e6, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 23]

The parameter n_iters was set to 5, as larger values were found to increase the running time signiﬁcantly, but with little improve-
ment in performance. Doublet scores were obtained from the function doubletdetection.BoostClassiﬁer.ﬁt.
DoubletFinder: The method was executed by following the instruction at https://github.com/chris-mcginnis-ucsf/DoubletFinder.
Doublet scores were obtained from the function doubletFinder_v3 in R package DoubletFinder (v 2.0.3) with parameters set to
default.
DoubletDecon: The method was executed by following the instruction at https://github.com/EDePasquale/DoubletDecon.
Doublet predictions were obtained from the function Main_Doublet_Decon in R package DoubletDecon (v 1.1.5) with parameters
set to default.
Solo: The method was executed by following the instruction at the GitHub repository https://github.com/calico/Solo
Every scRNA-seq count matrix was transformed into the loom format as required by the method. The parameters were set the
same as those in the ﬁle Solo_params_example.json, which was downloaded from the GitHub repository. Doublet scores were ob-
tained from the ﬁle softmax_scores.npy.
Measures of Doublet-Detection Accuracy
Methodologically, computational doublet-detection methods employ binary classiﬁcation algorithms to distinguish between two
classes: singlets and doublets. AUPRC and AUROC, two measures of the overall accuracy of a binary classiﬁcation algorithm,
were used to evaluate the overall doublet-detection accuracy of each method. These two measures were calculated using the func-
tions pr.curve and roc.curve in R package PRROC (v 1.3.1). Both functions input two vectors: the predicted doublet scores of true
singlets and those of true doublets, and they output AUPRC and AUROC, one value each.
Simulation of scRNA-seq Datasets Containing Doublets
All synthetic scRNA-seq datasets used in this study were generated in two steps. In Step 1, singlets in each dataset were generated
by scDesign ( Li and Li, 2019 ), which estimated a generative model of gene expression proﬁles from a real scRNA-seq dataset (cell
type: HEK293t; protocol: 10x Genomics; gene number: 18760). The detailed experimental settings are described in the next subsec-
tion. In Step 2, given the number of singlets and a pre-speciﬁed doublet rate (i.e., the proportion of doublets among all droplets), the
corresponding number of doublets were generated by random pairing of singlets. In detail, two randomly sampled singlets had their
gene expression proﬁles (in UMI counts) averaged by gene, and that averaged proﬁle is called a prototype doublet. For each of the 16
real scRNA-seq datasets, a doublet-to-singlet size ratio, deﬁned as (average doublet library size)/(average singlet library size), was
calculated. Then the library size of each prototype doublet was multiplied by a factor sampled from a normal distribution, whose
mean and standard division were set to the mean and standard deviation of the 16 doublet-to-singlet size ratios. This scaling
step turned prototype doublets into doublets, so that the doublet-to-singlet size ratios in the synthetic data were similar to those
in the real data. Finally, the singlets used to generate doublets were removed. In mathematical terms, if X singlets were generated
in Step 1 and the doublet rate was Y (a value between 0 and 1), then after Step 2 the numbers of doublets and singlets would be
XY/(1+Y) and X(1-Y)/(1+Y), respectively, both rounded to the nearest integers. For example, if 1000 singlets were generated in
Step 1 and the doublet rate was 20%, the numbers of doublets and singlets in the ﬁnal dataset would be 167 and 667, respectively,
making a total number of 834 droplets.
Experimental Settings Used in Benchmarking Simulations
80 scRNA-seq datasets were generated by scDesign to benchmark doublet-detection methods in four aspects: varying doublet
rates, sequencing depths (i.e., per-cell library sizes), cell types, and between-cell-type heterogeneity levels.
C 20 synthetic datasets were generated with doublet rates increasing from 2% to 40% by a step size of 2%. The per-cell library
size was set to 2000 UMI counts. All datasets contained two cell types. Based on the data generation scheme described in the
last subsection, 500 singlets were generated for each cell type in Step 1. In Step 2, doublets were introduced based on each
doublet rate, and the singlets used to generate doublets were removed.
C 20 synthetic datasets were generated with per-cell library sizes increasing from 500 to 10,000 UMI counts by a step size of 500
counts. All datasets contained two cell types. Based on the data generation scheme described in the last subsection, 500 sin-
glets were generated for each cell type in Step 1. In Step 2, doublets were introduced based on a 20% doublet rate, and the
singlets used to generate doublets were removed.
C 19 synthetic datasets were generated with numbers of cell types increasing from 2 to 20 by a step size of 1. The per-cell library
size was set to 2000 UMI counts. Based on the data generation scheme described in the last subsection, 500 singlets were
generated for each cell type in Step 1. In Step 2, doublets were introduced based on a 20% doublet rate, and the singlets used
to generate doublets were removed.
C 21 synthetic datasets were generated with varying heterogeneity levels between two cell types. The heterogeneity level was
controlled by four parameters (pUp, pDown, fU, and fL) in scDesign. Speciﬁcally, pUp and pDown denote the proportions of
up- and down-regulated genes, and fU and fL deﬁne the upper and lower bounds of fold changes in the expression levels of DE
genes. The following parameter combinations were used to generate 21 heterogeneity levels:
Level 1: pUp = 0.010, pDown = 0.010, fU = 1.0, and fL = 0.5;
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194.e1–e6, February 17, 2021 e3


[PDF_PAGE 24]

Level 2: pUp = 0.012, pDown = 0.012, fU = 1.2, and fL = 0.6;
.
Level 21: pUp = 0.050, pDown = 0.050, fU = 5.0, and fL = 2.5.
At all heterogeneity levels, the per-cell library size was set to 2000 UMI counts. Based on the data generation scheme described in
the last subsection, 500 singlets were generated for each cell type in Step 1. In Step 2, doublets were introduced based on a 20%
doublet rate, and the singlets used to generate doublets were removed.
DE Gene Analysis
One synthetic scRNA-seq dataset was generated by scDesign to have two cell types. The per-cell library size was 10,000 UMI
counts. The pUp and pDown parameters in scDesign were both set to 0.03, suggesting that a total of 6% of genes were DE be-
tween the two cell types (3% up-expressed and 3% down-expressed). The fU and fL parameters in scDesign (i.e., the upper and
lower bound of fold changes for DE genes) were set to 3 and 1.5, res pectively. Based on the data ge neration scheme described in
the Subsection ‘‘Simulation of scRNA-seq datasets containing doublets,’’ 500 singlets were generated for each cell type in Step 1.
In Step 2, doublets were introduced based on the 40% doublet rat e, and the singlets used to generate doublets were removed.
Three DE methods—DESeq2 ( Love et al., 2014 ), MAST ( Finak et al., 2015 ), and the Wilcoxon rank-sum test ( Fay and Proschan,
2010) implemented in the R package Seurat (v 3.1.5) ( Butler et al., 2018 ; Stuart et al., 2019 )—were applied to this dataset
(‘‘contaminated dataset’’ containing both singlets and doublets), its clean version without doublets (‘‘clean dataset’’ only contain-
ing singlets), and its post-doublet-detection version after eac h doublet-detection method was applied (the top 40% droplets that
received the highest doublet scores were removed). After each D E method was applied to every data set, genes whose Bonferroni-
corrected p-values did not exceed 0.05 were identiﬁed as DE. Three accuracy measures—precision, recall, and TNR—were calcu-
lated for every set of identiﬁed DE genes. For each DE method, its accuracy on the contaminated dataset and the clean dataset
were used as the negative and positive controls, respectively, for benchmarking its accuracy on the post-doublet-detection data-
sets ( Figures 2 Ba n d2 C ) .
Identiﬁcation of Highly Variable Genes
Three synthetic datasets were generated with 10%, 20%, and 40% doublet rates, respectively. The per-cell library size was set to
2000 UMI counts. All datasets contained two cell types. Based on the data generation scheme described in the Subsection ‘‘Simu-
lation of scRNA-seq datasets containing doublets,’’ 500 singlets were generated for each cell type in Step 1. In Step 2, doublets were
introduced based on each doublet rate, and the singlets used to generate doublets were removed. To identify the highly variable
genes (HVGs), we applied the function FindVariableFeatures in R package Seurat (v 3.1.5) with default parameters to the three data-
sets (‘‘contaminated datasets’’ containing both singlets and doublets; one dataset per doublet rate), their clean versions without dou-
blets (‘‘clean datasets’’ only containing singlets), and their post-doublet-detection version after each doublet-detection method was
applied (the top 10%, 20%, or 40% droplets that received the highest doublet scores were removed, and the removal percentage
was set to the doublet rate). We refer to the identiﬁed HVGs as contaminated HVGs, clean HVGs, and post-doublet-detection HVGs,
respectively. The Jaccard index between two sets of HVGs was calculated by the function simi in R package proxy (v 0.4-24)
(Figure 2D).
Cell Clustering Analysis
Three synthetic scRNA-seq datasets were generated by scDesign to have four, six, and eight cell types. The per-cell library size was
2000 UMI counts. Based on the data generation scheme described in the Subsection ‘‘Simulation of scRNA-seq datasets containing
doublets,’’ 500 singlets were generated for each cell type in Step 1. In Step 2, doublets were introduced based on a 20% doublet rate,
and the singlets used to generate doublets were removed. The heterogeneity between cell types was determined by the default pUp,
pDown, fU, and fL parameters in scDesign. After each doublet-detection method was applied to each dataset, the top x% of droplets,
which received the highest doublet scores (with the removal percentage x% ranging from 0% to 25% by a step size of 1%), were
removed; then two clustering algorithms—Louvain clustering implemented in R package Seurat (v 3.1.5) and DBSCAN ( Ester
et al., 1996 ) implemented in R package dbscan (v 1.1–5)—were used to identify cell clusters. Finally, the numbers of cell clusters
were compared with the numbers of cell types to evaluate the effectiveness of doublet removal ( Figures 2 E and S2A). Whenever
the number of cell clusters matched the number of cell types, the proportion of singlets among the remaining droplets was used
to measure each doublet-detection method’s capacity for removing homotypic doublets ( Figures 2 F and S2B). In the example of
four cell types, if a doublet-detection method (given a clustering algorithm) correctly led to four cell clusters under six removal per-
centages, then a proportion of singlets was calculated for each of the 24 clusters (four clusters times six removal percentages), re-
sulting in 24 proportions.
Cell Trajectory Inference
Two scRNA-seq datasets were generated by Splatter ( Zappia et al., 2017 ) to have cell trajectories. Both datasets contained 1000
genes. In Step 1 of the data generation scheme described in the Subsection ‘‘Simulation of scRNA-seq datasets containing dou-
blets,’’ the ﬁrst dataset had 500 singlets following a bifurcating trajectory, whose two branches had 250 singlets each, and the second
dataset had 1000 singlets from a conjunction of three sequential trajectories, two of which had 333 singlets and the other had 334
singlets. In Step 2 for both datasets, doublets were introduced based on a 20% doublet rate, and the singlets used to generate dou-
ll
Article
e4 Cell Systems 12, 176–194.e1–e6, February 17, 2021


[PDF_PAGE 25]

blets were removed. Parameters in Splatter were set to default except for de.prob and de.facLoc, which were set to 0.5 and 0.2,
respectively. Each dataset was expanded into a suite, including its original version (‘‘contaminated dataset’’), clean version without
doublets (‘‘clean dataset’’), and its post-doublet-detection version after each doublet-detection method was applied (the top 20%
droplets that received the highest doublet scores were removed). For the ﬁrst suite of datasets, cell trajectories were constructed
by Slingshot ( Street et al., 2018 ) based on the pipeline available at https://github.com/kstreet13/slingshot/blob/master/vignettes/
vignette.Rmd.
For the second suite of datasets, the minimum spanning tree (MST) algorithm implemented in R package slingshot (v 1.6.1) was
used to construct cell trajectories. The trajectories constructed from the contaminated dataset and the clean dataset were used
as the negative and positive controls, respectively, for benchmarking the trajectories inferred from the post-doublet-detection data-
sets (Figures 3A and 3B).
In the temporally DE genes analysis, a scRNA-seq dataset with a single trajectory was generated by following the Slingshot pipeline
available at https://github.com/kstreet13/slingshot/blob/master/vignettes/vignette.Rmd.
This dataset contained 750 genes, whose temporal expression d ynamics were categorized into four types: 500 stable genes
with unchanged mean expression levels, 100 activated genes wi th increasing mean expression levels, 100 deactivated genes
with decreasing mean expression levels, and 50 transient genes with mean expression levels ﬁrst increasing and then
decreasing, along the trajectory. The genes of the latter thre e types were deﬁned as temporally DE genes. The mean expression
levels of all 750 genes were speciﬁed by following the Slingshot pipeline. The per-cell library sizes were sampled from a nega-
tive binomial distribution with mean 1875 and dispersion 4. In th e generation of a singlet, the 750 gene expression levels were
sampled from a multinomial distribution with the number of trials as the (randomly sampled) per-cell library size and the prob-
ability of success as the 750 genes’ normalized mean expressi on levels (summing up to 1). Following this, 300 singlets were
generated in Step 1 of the data generation scheme described in the Subsection ‘‘Simulation of scRNA-seq datasets containing
doublets.’’ In Step 2, doublets were introduced based on a 20% d oublet rate, and the singlets used to generate doublets were
removed.
After data generation, the pseudotime of each droplet was inferred by Slingshot and TSCAN on this dataset (‘‘contaminated data’’),
its clean version without doublets (‘‘clean data’’), and its post-doublet-detection version after each doublet-detection method was
applied (the top 20% droplets that received the highest doublet scores were removed). Then for each dataset, we regressed
each gene’s expression levels in all droplets on the inferred pseudotime of the same droplets by the general additive model
(GAM), which was implemented in the R function gam, and obtained a p-value. As a result, the genes with Bonferroni-corrected
p-values under 0.05 were identiﬁed as temporally DE genes. Three accuracy measures—precision, recall, and TNR—were calculated
for every set of identiﬁed temporally DE genes. The accuracy on the contaminated data and the clean data were used as the negative
and positive controls, respectively, for benchmarking the accuracy on the post-doublet-detection data obtained by each doublet-
detection method ( Figures 3C and 3D).
Distributed Computing
We used two real scRNA-seq datasets pbmc-ch and pbmc-2ctrl-dm to compare the performance of doublet-detection methods un-
der distributed computing. These two datasets are relatively large in our real data collection, containing 15,272 and 13,913 droplets
(Table 1). For each doublet-detection method, its accuracy (AUPRC and AUROC) on the original datasets were used as the baselines.
Next, the original dataset was randomly split into two, four, six, eight, and ten equally-sized batches for distributed computing. For
every number of batches, each doublet-detection method was executed on each batch separately, the resulting doublet scores were
concatenated across batches, and AUPRC and AUROC were calculated for the concatenated doublet scores and compared with the
baselines (Figures 4A and 4B).
Scalability, Stability, and Usability
25 synthetic scRNA-seq datasets with varying numbers of droplets were generated by scDesign to examine the scalability of
doublet-detection methods. Speciﬁcally, the number of genes was ﬁxed to 5000, and the number of droplets increased from 400
to 10,000, with a step size of 400. Each doublet-detection method was executed on the 25 datasets, and the relationship between
its running time and the number of droplets was plotted in Figure 4E.
Two real datasets, pbmc-ch and pbmc-2ctrl-dm, were used to evaluate the stability of doublet-detection methods. From each da-
taset, 20 subsets were generated by randomly subsampling 90% of droplets and 90% of genes. Each doublet-detection method was
executed on all these subsets, and its stability was shown by the distributions of the resulting AUPRC and AUROC across subsets
(Figure 4F).
Four criteria were deﬁned for doublet-detection methods’ usability: software quality, execution convenience, publication, and
documentation & support. The software quality criterion indicates whether a doublet-detection method can be executed on all
real and synthetic datasets used in this study. The execution convenience criterion is related to the popularity of the computational
platform required to run a method. Methods written in R and Python packages are preferred because of the popularity of these two
languages. The publication criterion is regarding whether a doublet-detection method has been published in a peer-reviewed journal.
The documentation & support criterion evaluates a method’s user-support resources, such as open-source code, tutorials, and
active Q&As. Each criterion has three levels: excellent, good, and fair, corresponding to a score of 2, 1, and 0, respectively. The ﬁnal
usability score of a method was deﬁned as the sum of the method’s scores in these four criteria.
ll
Article
Cell Systems 12, 176–194.e1–e6, February 17, 2021 e5


[PDF_PAGE 26]

Accuracy of Computational Doublet Detection in Relation to Experimental Techniques for Doublet Labeling
Four experimental techniques were used to label doublets in the 16 real datasets used in this study: cell hashing ( Stoeckius et al.,
2018), species mixture ( Wolock et al., 2019 ), demuxlet ( Kang et al., 2018 ), and MULTI-seq ( McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b). To
examine the relationship between the accuracy of computational doublet-detection methods and the use of experimental techniques
for doublet labeling, we calculated the mean AUPRC of each computational method across the datasets labeled by each experi-
mental technique ( Figure S2 D; Table S11 ). Overall, all computational doublet-detection methods achieved the highest accuracy
on the species-mixture datasets, followed by the cell-hashing, MULTI-seq, and demuxlet datasets. This is an expected result since
doublet-detection methods are more capable of identifying heterotypic doublets than homotypic doublets by design (Lun et al., 2016;
Gayoso and Shor, 2018 ; Bais and Kostka, 2020 ; DePasquale et al., 2019 ; McGinnis et al., 2019a , 2019b; Wolock et al., 2019 ; Bern-
stein et al., 2020 ), and all the labeled doublets in the species-mixture datasets are heterotypic (i.e., formed by cells of two species);
meanwhile, the cell-hashing, MULTI-seq, and demuxlet datasets contain labeled doublets that are both heterotypic and homotypic
(e.g., formed by cells of the same type from two samples or individuals), and they miss certain heterotypic doublets (e.g., formed by
cells of different types from the same sample or individual). Among the eight doublet-detection methods (excluding DoubletDecon
which cannot generate doublet scores), DoubletFinder, cxds, and Solo achieved the highest detection accuracy on the species-
mixture datasets, demonstrating their strength of identifying heterotypic doublets. DoubletFinder was also the top performer on
the MULTI-seq and demuxlet datasets in terms of mean AUPRC, while Solo excelled on the cell-hashing datasets. Interestingly,
cxds exhibited the largest performance discrepancy between the species-mixture datasets and the other three types of datasets,
highlighting its stronger priority towards identifying heterotypic doublets than other methods’.
Pairwise Similarities of Computational Doublet-Detection Methods
First, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient between every two doublet-detection methods (except hybrid, which is an
ensemble of bcds and cxds, and DoubletDecon, which cannot generate doublet scores) in terms of their doublet scores in each
of the 16 benchmark datasets; for every pair of methods, we averaged their 16 Pearson correlation coefﬁcients ( Table S12). Among
the 21 pairs of methods, DoubletFinder-DoubletDetection, Solo-bcds, and DoubletFinder-bcds have the largest mean correlations.
Second, we calculated the Jaccard index between every two doublet-detection methods (except hybrid and DoubletDecon) in terms
of their identiﬁed doublets, whose numbers are set equal to the number of labeled doublets, in each of the 16 benchmark datasets; for
every pair of methods, we averaged their 16 Jaccard indices ( Table S13). Among the 21 pairs of methods, DoubletFinder-Double-
tDetection, DoubletDetection-Solo, and DoubletFinder-Solo have the largest mean Jaccard indices, which reﬂect the large overlaps
of their identiﬁed doublets. These two similarity analyses indicate the possibility of developing an ensemble method to combine the
top-performing methods that are not too similar ( Hastie et al., 2009 ). Given the high accuracy of DoubletFinder and the distinctive
algorithm design of cxds (the only method without artiﬁcial doublets), these two methods may serve as good candidates to be com-
bined into an ensemble method.
Comparison of Hyperparameter Selection in kNN-Base Methods
The algorithm designs of Scrublet and DoubletFinder are similar because they both deﬁne each droplet’s doublet score as the pro-
portion of artiﬁcial doublets among the k-nearest neighbors of this droplet in the principalcomponent (PC) space. The major differ-
ence between Scrublet and DoubletFinder is how they select hyperparameters, including the number of artiﬁcial doublets to
generate, the number of genes used to perform the principal component analysis, the number of PCs to deﬁne nearest neighbors,
and the number of nearest neighbors k. Table S14 summarizes the default hyperparameter settings of Scrublet and DoubletFinder. In
particular, DoubletFinder automatically selects k by maximizing the mean-variance normalized bimodality coefﬁcient ( Pﬁster et al.,
2013) of the distribution of doublet scores. To examine the effect of hyperparameter selection on the method performance, we
selected four real datasets on which DoubletFinder outperformed Scrublet, and replaced the hyperparameters of Scrublet by those
of DoubletFinder, including the ks selected by DoubletFinder for those datasets. Figure S2E summarizes the AUPRC values of three
methods—DoubletFinder, Scrublet with default hyperparameters, and Scrublet with the same hyperparameters as DoubletFinder—
on each of the four datasets. With the hyperparameters of DoubletFinder, Scrublet improved its detection accuracy on two datasets,
nuc-MULTI and pbmc-1C-dm, but it still underperformed DoubletFinder. On the other two datasets, cline-ch and pbmc-1A-dim,
Scrublet performed similarly or even worse, respectively, with the hyperparameters of DoubletFinder. This result suggests that hyper-
parameter selection is an important but not the only factor that determines the performance of doublet-detection methods. Other
aspects of algorithm design, including the generation of artiﬁcial doublets and algorithm implementation, also play critical rules.
ll
Article
e6 Cell Systems 12, 176–194.e1–e6, February 17, 2021